Weird Tales — February 1928 (Volume 11, Issue 2)


					edited by Farnsworth Wright





1928





Exported from Wikisource on April 11, 2023





Weird TalesVOLUME XI NUMBER 2

Published monthly by the Popular Fiction Publishing Company, 2457 E. Washington Street, Indianapolis, Ind. Entered as second-class matter March 20, 1923, at the post office at Indianapolis, Ind., under the act of March 3, 1879. Single copies, 25 cents. Subscription, $2.50O a year in the United States; $3.00 a year in Canada. English office: Charles Lavell, 13, Serjeant's Inn, Fleet Street, E. C. 4, London. The publishers are not responsible for the loss of unsolicited manuscripts, although every care will be taken of such material while in their possession. The contents of this magazine are fully protected by copyright and must not be reproduced either wholly or in part without permission from the publishers.

NOTE—All manuscripts and communications should be addressed to the publishers' Chicago office at 450 East Ohio Street, Chicago, Ill. FARNSWORTH WRIGHT, Editor.

Copyright, 1928, by the Popular Fiction Publishing Company





Contents for February, 1928



Cover design C. C. Senf

⁠Illustrating a scene in "The Ghost Table"

The Ghost-Table Elliot O'Donnell 149

⁠An exciting story of occult phenomena—a rampant beast, lusting to kill you, was this table with the tiger claws

The Call of Cthulhu H. P. Lovecraft 159

⁠Slithering through the earth came the thoughts of Cthulhu, and mankind faced the rule of an obscene and incredible monstrosity

The Shadow on the Moor Stuart Strauss 179

⁠A creepy tale of the pre-druidistic ruins of England—out on the moor were dancing, and strange wild music, and death

The Curse of Alabad, and Ghinu and Aratza Wilfred B. Talman 188

⁠"If she sinks, she is innocent, but if she floats, she is a witch and must die!"—a tale of old New York





Mephistopheles and Company, Ltd. Seabury Quinn 193

⁠Jules de Grandin rescues an Austrian girl from the fiendish grasp of a heartless devil-syndicate

The Purple Sea Frank Owen 213

⁠Another exquisite Chinese fantasy, as full of color as was "The Wind That Tramps the World"

The Giant World (Part 2) Ray Cummings 221

⁠A three-part weird-scientific serial—a distant world—giants growing into largeness unfathomable—gooseflesh adventures

The Three Witches Ernest Dowson 236

⁠Verse

The Isle of the Fairy Morgana John Martin Leahy 237

⁠A cruel murder took place on Flang Island, hidden from the world, yet Guy Garford saw every frightful detail of the murder

Folks Used to Believe:

⁠The Barnacle Goose Alvin F. Harlow 252

⁠One of the curious superstitions of our ancestors

The Mist Monster Granville S. Hoss 253

⁠A weird mist billowed up from the cape—and horrific was the thing that it did

The Dream Snake Robert E. Howard 257

⁠An eery snake story—an unusual tale—night by night the horror grew, until it completely enmeshed the doomed man

Weird Story Reprint

⁠Clarimonde Théophile Gautier 261

⁠"La Morte Amoreuse" the most exquisitely beautiful of all vampire tales, translated by Lafcadio Hearn

The Eyrie 282

⁠A chat with the readers





This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was legally published within the United States (or the United Nations Headquarters in New York subject to Section 7 of the United States Headquarters Agreement) before 1964, and copyright was not renewed.

For Class A renewals records (books only) published between 1923 and 1963, check the Stanford University Copyright Renewal Database.

For other renewal records of publications between 1922–1950 see the University of Pennsylvania copyright records scans.

For all records since 1978, search the U.S. Copyright Office records.

See also the Rutgers copyright renewal records for further information.



Works published in 1928 would have had to renew their copyright in either 1955 or 1956, i.e. at least 27 years after they were first published/registered but not later than 31 December in the 28th year. As this work's copyright was not renewed, it entered the public domain on 1 January 1957.



* * *



This work may be in the public domain in countries and areas with longer native copyright terms that apply the rule of the shorter term to foreign works.





It is imperative that contributors search the renewal databases and ascertain that there is no evidence of a copyright renewal before using this license. Failure to do so will result in the deletion of the work as a copyright violation.





The Ghost Table by Elliot O'Donnell

“Yvonne’s nails sank into my arm, waking me very thoroughly.”

YVONNE has the devil’s own taste for the odd and curious, so that a gift truly pleasing to her involves an assault on my imagination more than on the bankroll. And, as usual, the day following was our wedding anniversary; time had once again slipped up on me, and I was totally unprepared to pay the day its honors in the shape of jade necklaces, Japanese lacquer, or other bit of grotesque loveliness wherewith she loved to adorn her person or our already crowded apartment. Heaven help us, but why couldn’t the girl let a diamond tiara or a bucket of Burmese sapphires suffice, instead of craving outlandish trifles the pursuit of which always drives me at a pace just three jumps ahead of the madhouse?

I prowled about, stalking the perfect gift which would write another chapter on how to be happy with a woman of quaint tastes, and envying those fortunate lads whose problems were solved with cobra-skin shoes, or two ounces of silk and lace, or a new coupé. Despair prowled with me.

And then——

I never did know what heaven-sent hunch prompted me to enter that second-hand furniture store in whose farthest comer I recognized at a glance the perfect gift for Yvonne. Anyway, the longer I looked, the better I liked it. What a table! Long, narrow, low; its outlandish, foreign lines carved in a dark wood whose dusky, soft luster reminded me of the deep richness of a pair of cordovan hoots the old colonel used to wear when the Fifteenth paraded in Rizal.

"I knew you'd fancy it," exclaimed the shopman, as he removed its burden of books and dusted the top. "Only fifteen guineas. No veneer there; solid teak," he lied.

It wasn't teak; of that I was sure. It reminded me rather of that iron-hard and iron-heavy wood from Mindanao, more or less properly called Philippine ebony.

"Wonderful workmanship," continued the shopkeeper. "Look at those legs, sir."

They were wonderful: exquisitely fashioned, curving slightly outward and ending in feet fashioned to resemble the paws of a beast of prey— savage, pitiless claws whose realism made me for a moment wonder why the table was not confined in a cage.

More odd than the table itself was the heavy chain that secured one leg to a massive ring in the floor.

"Fifteen guineas," I reflected. Then, to the dealer: "What the devil! Do you chain it to keep it from walking away? For it's certainly too heavy to steal."

The dealer started, coughed, flushed. My remark had reminded him of what in his enthusiasm he had doubtless forgotten: that tables are not usually shackled to the floor.

"There were two or three attempts made to steal this very table from my window," he began, looking very foolish. "It's no end an attractive piece. And these collectors, you know—begging your pardon, sir, but you yourself might be tempted——"

Plainly the man was improvising. The poor fellow probably had persecution delusions, or something of the kind, and felt a bit wooden at having me notice the evidence thereof.

The more I looked at that table and its graceful, feline curves——

"Fifteen guineas? . . . How about ten, cash? And"—I paused, then shot it to him—"and how about a bill of sale with this curious table which has to be chained to the floor in the most obscure comer of your shop?"

That sunk him!

"Very good, sir. Yes, sir. And I can give you a bill of sale. I'm a reputable dealer, sir."

"Not so bad," I congratulated myself, as I left the shop with a bill of sale. "Perhaps it isn't stolen property; but there certainly is something wrong with its past . . . though I care not a hoot in a hailstorm," I concluded, as I pictured Yvonne's ecstasies at that pagan table with its savage claws, curiously carved legs, and catlike grace. If the personality of a piece of furniture could grow on me in such a short while, her temperamental majesty would undoubtedly be thrilled from her toenails to her eyebrows.



True to his promise, the dealer delivered the table that very afternoon, shortly after I reached home and told Yvonne of my discovery. The lift as usual was out of order: so I was not surprized to note that the two men who brought the table to our apartment on the third floor were somewhat the worse for wear. They set it in the middle of the drawing-room as though it had been a red-hot rock, and edged away front it a pace or two.

"It's heavy as a battleship," I remarked, hefting it.

No wonder the men were exhausted; that massive table resisted my grip as though its claws had sunk into the floor. "Heavy as a battleship?" repeated one of the porters. "And that's only 'alf of it. Thank you, sir."



Pocketing the shilling I handed him, the porter and his companion departed, and seemed pleased at the opportunity. I rather wondered that they spared me the garrulity I might have expected of their efforts to fritter away ten minutes of their employer’s time, delaying their return to the shop and further duty.

"Oh, Val, what a perfectly marvelous table! I never saw anything like it——"

If I'd walked in with the pagoda of Shwei-dagon, she couldn't have been more enthusiastic. Her sister Annie, who was visiting us at the time, was equally pleased, though not quite so frenzied in her approval. I thoroughly enjoyed their comments on the table, feeling very much the conquistador displaying the plunder of a new world; and after the first five minutes of their fanfare of ecstasy, I wondered how I had ever in the presence of such beauty contrived to beat the price down five guineas . . . about twenty-five dollars, real money. And thus I gave little thought to the strange conduct of Goole, our collie, who, as the porters entered with the table, growled, and fled from the room, whining.

"'Vonne, it's lovely . . . and so odd," remarked Annie, as Yvonne with a final caress broke away from me and set to work dusting the lustrous tabletop. "It's positively uncanny how anything of wood can be so lifelike. I’m almost afraid to turn my back to it."

"And Val calls me temperamental!" jeered Yvonne.

But it does remind me of some beast of prey," insisted Annie. "Why, even the wood has leopard markings——"

"Stupid!" I protested; "leopards are spotted, not striped."

And then for the first time I noted that the top, when viewed from a certain angle, did have the faintest, shadowy suggestion of tiger stripes which very oddly gave it the appearance of having a slightly convex surface.

"You two will be the death of me!" laughed Yvonne. "Zebras are just as striped, and they're nothing but sport-model jackasses!"

And that settled the discussion.



That night, some time after we had gone to bed, Yvonne woke me . . . or thought she did.

"Did you hear that?" she whispered.

I had been hearing it for some time, and for some time had been wondering whether an unreasonable amount of Paul Whitby's Bacardi punch and three Patargas Coronas in a row could have made me hear that scarcely perceptible but persistent purring which had gradually become a dull thump-thump.

"Do I hear what?" I contrived to mutter sleepily.

"That awful thumping."

And Yvonne's nails sank into my arm, waking me very thoroughly. It was all rather disturbing. Things were becoming involved: for Yvonne hadn't smoked even one of those Patargas, and scarcely tasted that potent, aromatic punch; and she too was hearing what had now become the heavy tramping of a wooden colossus striving to tread stealthily across strange territory.

"Burglars!” she gasped. "Do go to the 'phone and call the police."

"Police be damned! By the time the operator makes the connection and I manage to say 'Are you there?' in the proper mumble, I'll be slugged and the house looted. Anyway, I think it's a pile-driver working on that building just around the corner——"

"You would!" sneered Yvonne. "Oh——"

Good Lord! I couldn't laugh that off: from the drawing-room came the sound of a regiment of cavalry charging over a woodpile, which didn't inspire me to investigate before dawn.

"Maybe he was right about that table. Someone's trying to steal it——

And that settled it: if I let anyone get away with Yvonne's precious table, life with her would be unbearable for years to come.

"Bunk!" I protested; and then piled out and dug a service .45 out of the dresser.

Goole's whines didn't add to my peace of mind.

But I slunk down the hall, by no means comforted by that crashing and clattering in the drawing-room, accented by the rattle of andirons and the tinkle of shattering glass. I hugged the wall, creeping through the darkness toward the riot. At the entrance of the drawing-room——

"Stick 'em up, and be quick about it!" I growled as savagely as my nerves permitted, and snapped on the light. No one stuck 'em up. No one was there. The ensuing silence was all the more awful for having come out of such a terrific din.

I still don’t know whether my relief exceeded my wonder: relief at not having to shoot it out against Lord knows what odds; and wonder at the dead, heavy silence that overwhelmed that fearful clattering and thumping the instant I snapped on the lights.

Goole whined dolorously at the farther end of the hall.

The furniture was a sight: chairs upset, the what-not thrown on the sofa with two of its legs broken, the fire irons scattered about on the hearth; and in one comer of the room, some distance from where we had placed it, was the newly purchased table. It seemed that someone had given it a terrific push which had sent it skating across the polished floor only to halt when a small Kurdish rug which lay in its path had become entangled with those fierce claws and brought it to a stop.

I shivered as I regarded that long, narrow, faintly banded and slightly convex top, and those out-curved legs and predatory claws glistening silkily under the drawing-room lights. It reminded me of some beast of prey poised to spring. And then I returned to tell Yvonne that all was clear as far as I could determine.

Yvonne was incredulous, and simply couldn’t believe that the creators of the disturbance had vanished so mysteriously; but a search of the house convinced her. And then she followed me on my return to the drawing-room to view the battlefield. Still not entirely convinced of the departure of the intruders, she sought to take Goole with us. But Goole wisely took cover beneath our bed, all the while alternating snarls with terrified whines.

And then Annie, awakened by the height of the disturbance, finally ventured out of her room, joining us as we went to take another look at the upset drawing-room. She was entirely in favor of leaving the house and spending the rest of the night at a hotel.

"Don't be stupid," I chided. "I've searched the entire house and tried every door. There's not a sign of anyone's having entered or left." And, clutching at any opportunity to laugh it off, I continued, blaming the tumult on Yvonne's Angora cat: "Look! The window is slightly open. Probably Miggles was entertaining a few playmates, and escaped——"

"Now I'll tell one," retorted Annie. "Miggles would of course have moved that heavy table and wrapped a rug about its legs."

That should have finished me, but I came up for more, mentioning the heavy chains that had shackled the table to the floor of the furniture store.



"I will admit," I improvised, "that this may be one of those odd and precious pieces that some collector covets; and by terrorizing the dealer, he hopes to beat down the price . . . only I came along and crabbed the game, so I'm getting a taste of some collector's schrechlichkeit. . . ."

Rather good, what? I thought so; and Annie didn't argue. Yvonne was thrilled at the glittering notion. And with peace once more restored, we sought what little sleep could be salvaged from the remains of the night.



Yvonne spent a considerable portion of the following day in cleaning and polishing her prize; and when a number of her friends came in to tea, they went into raptures over it, especially over its feet and legs, which took their fancy enormously. Yvonne, strutting her table as though she herself had carved it, spoke of the faint tiger markings and the almost imperceptible convexity of the top; and then she abruptly changed the subject, for not a trace of either peculiarity was visible. Strange, very strange; but perhaps those oddities were brought out only by artificial light—those, and other oddities, I found myself thinking, in spite of myself.

"I can't believe those claws are wooden," remarked one of the ladies from Glebe Place, as she bent down to examine them. "So very lifelike, and so beautifully shaped, and so dreadfully sharp and cruel. One can imagine them tearing and rending one to pieces."

"How fantastic!"

Yvonne laughed. But I caught a troubled light in her eyes.

That night before going to bed we moved the table very carefully into one corner of the drawing-room, locked the door, and took out the key. Being very tired, we were soon asleep.

But my sleep was troubled. A solemn, deep-toned purring rolled in my ears, impressing itself on my sleep, and finally increasing to a pitch that woke me from my troubled half-sleep. Then, as before, came that dull thump-thump as of some wooden monster seeking to advance stealthily.

"Good Lord, again?" I groaned wearily.

And then——

A crashing, splintering, tinkling; the fearful screech of a small beast in mortal agony.

Annie burst into our room.

Again that scream of anguish.

And I repeated last night’s ritual, slinking down the hall, pistol in hand. The floor and walls trembled under that horrible thumping and pounding; but I finally did set the key in place, turned it——

As I reached in for the switch, a terrific crash against the door-jamb nearly knocked me from my feet. I opened up with the .45; and at the same instant, with my left hand, found the switch.

Silence. Deathly, oppressive. The hard, seasoned edge of the table had sunk deep into the softer wood of the door-jamb. But this time no Kurdish rug was wrapped about the legs of the table. Those feet—beautifully carved feet with exquisite claws—gleamed bloodily; and beneath them, pounded to shreds, mashed into the floor by that hardwood beast of prey, was Miggles, the cat whose mortal screams had awakened me.

Poor little kitten! We'd locked her in with that awful table.

Yvonne passed out then and there. I carried her to our bedroom and, leaving Annie to apply a few restoratives, returned to patch up some semblance of order. Believe me or not, it did take a bit of nerve to return to that fiend-ridden drawing-room.

I had scarcely entered when there came a pounding on our door, and someone demanding entrance in the name of the law, or the King, or whoever the appropriate person is on such occasions. A sergeant accompanied by a squad of police entered and took the situation in hand.

Most 'strawnary, he fancied, was such rioting at that hour of the night. Disturbing the peace, and all that, this discharging of firearms. And when I showed them the drawing-room, they registered amazement and proceeded to search the house thoroughly. However, finding nothing but some splintered furniture and the remains of a cat, the sergeant contented himself with taking notes on my pedigree for the past four generations, as well as the history of "the bloody tible" I'd blamed for the disturbance; and then, after accepting a shot of brandy and a one-pound note, he marched his squad from the scene of the melee.

But I knew the end was not in sight. The police had granted my right to open fire on an intruder at that hour of the night, even though that was a beastly hazardous habit; yet they knew that something, somewhere, was decidedly off-color; and I had reason to expect that for the next few weeks I'd be followed by mysterious strangers wherever I went, and the house kept under strict surveillance.



It was dawn before I restored order. Yvonne, having recovered sufficiently, assisted me; for, with the remains of Miggles disposed of, there was nothing to upset her nerves again, though she did eye that table apprehensively, and refused to turn her back to it. And I didn’t blame her.

"Val," she finally remarked, "you must get rid of that table at once——"

"Absolutely!" I agreed.

"It;s haunted. Burn it, or drop it in the Thames, or—poor little Miggles."

And Yvonne was in tears.

The long and short of it was that after sending Yvonne and Annie to spend a day or two in the country with their mother, I invited my friend Dr. Paul Whitby and his brother Mark to sit up all night in the flat with me. They came at about 10 that evening, and at 11 the three of us went into the drawing-room, seated ourselves on the sofa, switched off the lights, and waited for what I sensed would inevitably happen.

For some time we talked and laughed. Neither of my friends believed in supernatural manifestations; so that the idea of standing guard over a haunted table struck them as the height of absurdity. They candidly admitted that they were seeing the farce through to a finish only to please me. Perhaps if they'd seen the drawing-room before I cleaned it up, they'd not have been so skeptical.

Every now and then Mark would make some facetious remark at which Paul would laugh, and, responding with some bon mot of his own, would in return draw a snort from Mark. After about half an hour of it, however, Mark began to yawn; and I think they both were more than half asleep when the hall clock struck midnight.

Then there came a most intense silence, a clinging, paralyzing silence that oppressed me, forced the very life and vitality out of me, much as walking his post between 2 and 4 in the morning drives the vital force out of a soldier on guard, no matter how much rest he may previously have had. I felt an intense concentration centering about the sofa on which we sat: a driving, relentless vortex of thought-waves. Then came a distinct and protracted sigh as of one awakening from a deep, refreshing sleep.



Whatever it was, it was coming to life; that same savage, predatory life which had made a madhouse of my apartment the past two nights. My head reeled from the very strain of listening to the silence which followed that long sigh.

Finally there came another sigh, followed by a loud creak; then a muffled, shuddering sound as of a breath abruptly choked; another creak which could have come from no place other than the comer where I had placed that fiend-haunted table.

It was high time to awaken my companions. By dint of shaking them by the shoulders, I did succeed in arousing them from the stupor into which they had fallen; and it was several minutes before I could make them understand what was going on.

The noises in the comer had by this time entirely ceased. Again there was a long, oppressive silence; and it was not until 1, or perhaps half past—I had lost track of time, and a single stroke of the hall clock told me nothing—when there came another sigh, then another creak, and then a persistent, muffled throbbing, like the pulsing of African war-drums from a great distance: that same ominous, brooding thump-thump that had haunted me the past two nights; that solemn, fateful, deliberate beating that speaks of war and massacre and the devices of jungle devil-doctors.

I felt Paul grip me by the arm. And under any other circumstances I would have chuckled at the thought of those two pronounced skeptics getting their first taste of that bloodthirsty presence which had made a slaughter-house of my drawing-room.

More sighs and creaks, impressed on that terrifying crescendo of muffled pulsing; and then a rapid, irregular pounding, as if the table were rocking to and fro in great agitation, balancing first on one leg, then another.

“What the deuce can that be?” muttered Mark, as he rose from his seat.

The noises in the corner grew louder and louder; the clattering and jarring were succeeded by terrific thumps, just as if the table, trying to rise from the floor, were falling back each time it made the attempt.

And then I realized that my own muscles were contracting in sympathy with the efforts of this unseen monster, as if to help it set itself in motion! That last heave of my shoulders and leaning forward of my body seemed through the intervening space to have given it the final lift needed to set it lurching forward, moving across the room with a succession of bumps and thuds.

A yell of amazement from the usually cool and phlegmatic Mark; he too had felt the sorcery of that wooden demon. And then: "I'll stop you and get to the bottom of this trickery!"

The table leaped furiously, bounding in a mad rush to meet Mark's charge; then a series of bumps, snorts, and Mark's heavy breathing.

Paul and I sat in a stupor, terrified by this outrageous and impossible combat whose progress we could follow all too readily by the succession of thumps and crashes that marked its course about the room.

"Help! The damned thing's killing me!" shrieked Mark. And wrenched from our stupor by his shout of terror, we leaped to his assistance.

We found ourselves fighting for our lives. The thing we grappled, and from whose frenzy we sought to rescue Mark, seemed no longer a table, but a writhing, frantic beast of prey. We could feel it pulsating under our touch, hear it gasping and snarling as a creature in the throes of a desperate struggle. It was no longer wooden, but alive, vibrant with an outlandish, murderous force neither bestial nor human, but more terrific than either. We fought its leaps and rushes, and fought the horror with which it was inspiring us; struggled against the awful weariness which dulled us and prompted us to cease resisting our fate beneath those vicious claws which sought to grind us into the floor as they had crushed and torn Miggles.

Mark and Paul, vigorous and aggressive as they were, panted and groaned in the despair of that hideous combat, striving to gain a moment’s respite from that monster which rushed and battered us against the walls, the furniture, scattering everything before it. Nor did we dare relinquish our fast-weakening grip on the demon, lest it overwhelm us ere we could escape its triumphant charge. There was no escape from that vortex of horror, the driving, relentless mentality of which increased as we weakened.

Light! Great God, if we could only have a ray of light we might overcome this victorious Juggernaut which crushed and butted the life out of us, saw clearly in the darkness which confused us and nullified our efforts, shattered whatever co-operation might have turned the tide our way: for the cunning of the beast rather than its fierce energy dominated us.

And finally, despite its efforts, I did jab my finger into the pushbutton on the wall near the door against whose jamb the demon almost flattened me. Light! Brilliant, dazzling light that no sun-worshiper ever welcomed as we did!

The table shuddered convulsively and thumped from its rampant position to the floor.

My friends were so white and haggard that I scarcely knew them. Mark’s mouth bled; Paul was bruised and scarred; I was battered black and blue; and our clothes were in shreds.

“Thank God for light!” repeated Mark with more reverence than I had ever thought him capable of.

And we backed out of the drawingroom, not daring to turn our backs to that wooden monster.

The three of us sank into a heavy sleep from which we did not emerge until nearly noon.



Primed with coffee and several slugs A of brandy, we ventured into the drawing-room to contemplate the havoc wrought by that fearful combat; and not even daylight would entirely restore our courage. I stared at that lustrously gleaming table, and wondered how nearly those fine, fierce claws had missed a second immersion in blood; and then I glanced at Paul and Mark. A common impulse drew us to the fireplace.

Paul kindled a fire.

“Yes. I’ll chop the damned thing to bits and bum it,” I exclaimed quite needlessly. “Watch that beast while I get an ax.”

Mark, whose bruises and lacerations were quite painful, would not hear of first aid, and insisted that the execution take place at once.

My friends mustered up their courage and maneuvered that devilish, beautiful table into position so that I could swing freely without being cramped by chandeliers or furniture. We all felt that an extraordinary blow would be needed to cleave asunder that ghoulish lump of tropical wood: the savagery of its assault was still painfully fresh in our minds.

I squared off, getting as good a stance as I could on the polished floor; gripped the ax, poised it, made a practise swing, all the while eyeing that wooden monster, seeking a joint in its top, a vulnerable spot which would yield under my first blow: for I was possessed with the thought that the first stroke had to be mortal, else the thing would overwhelm us in its frenzy.



The table faced its executioner. Yet it was rather I who was at bay, ax in hand, awaiting the charge of a fierce beast of prey: and for once the levity of my insouciant friends was absent from their contemplation of a grotesque spectacle.

The fire in the grate crackled in merry anticipation.

"Get it done and over with, Val," whispered Mark.

The ax flickered upward . . . and then I paused at the crest of the stroke, halted by an insistent pounding at my front door. Someone was demanding admittance: and that prosaic fact dispelled the tensity of the preceding instant, and made it seem very absurd to stand, ax in hand, anticipating the leap of a hand-carved table.

"Let him in, Mark," I commanded; and I lowered the ax, for it is rather awkward to be caught in the act of assaulting a table in one's drawing-room. I felt somewhat the same relief I would have experienced had I suddenly been allowed to resign a position as the executioner of a human being. The insistent caller was the dealer who had sold me that accursed table.

"Oh, I say, you mustn't," he protested, forgetting his place so far as to lay his hand on my wrist. "Really, sir——"

"Now what in thunder is this?" I demanded. "I paid enough for this piece of iniquity, and by God I'll wreck it if I feel like it!"

"We jolly well will!" asserted Paul. "And since you sold it, what have you to say about it, my man?"

"Please, sir, put that ax aside and let me explain," begged the dealer. "It can't hurt you in daylight."

"So you knew all the while——"

The shopkeeper squirmed, coughed, and resumed: "Here's fifteen guineas, sir. And consider that I've bought the table."

"Well, how about the damage to my drawing-room?" I demanded. "You wilfully and knowingly sold——"

"Yes, sir, I'll confess I did. But I'll adjust that presently, sir. And then, noting that my fingers were again tightening on the ax-helve, "Please don't kill him, sir. I'll——"

"Kill him?" gasped Paul. "Really, now, but this is a bit thick. You might——"

And thrusting fifteen guineas into my hand, forcing me to relinquish the ax, the dealer set about explaining.



" A short time ago," he began, "I numbered among my friends a certain eminent scientist, Professor William Percival, a Fellow of the Royal Society”—the dealer paused impressively, then continued—"who was deeply interested in all questions pertaining to spiritualism, especially table-turning. It was his theory that the tiltings, rappings, and leapings about, when not due to fraud, were occasioned, not by animal magnetism, as is popularly supposed, but by the spiritual self or ego of someone present being actually thrown or projected into the table."

As the fellow warmed up, he lost his tradesman's manner and became quite the associate of Fellows of the Royal Society.

"He believed that such a feat, usually performed unconsciously, could be performed deliberately and at will, though only by the most intense and powerful concentration. To prove his theory he began experimenting on small objects: books, walking-sticks, newspapers. And after endless attempts, conducted in the dead of the night, between 12 and 3 in the morning, when, owing to the stillness, conditions are most favorable for concentration, he finally succeeded."

"The hell you say!" I interrupted. "Do you mean——?"



"Yes indeed. Quite.

"He was sitting in his chair," resumed the shopkeeper, "concentrating on being inside a certain wooden paper-cutter, moving it about, when, quite suddenly, he felt himself pass out of his body and walk about on the table. Then came, as he later explained, a kind of tug, as if someone were pulling him by the shoulders, and he was again in his body, in the chair. The paper-cutter was several inches from the spot where he had placed it.

"The next night he tried with a book, but with no success; but on the following evening, he concentrated on a Malacca stick, taking possession of it with his ego and forcing it to stand upright and pirouette about the room."

"Do you ask us to believe that?" demanded Paul.

"Precisely, sir. I saw that with my own eyes," affirmed the dealer. "And if I may continue——

"The professor deduced that objects of wood were more susceptible to projection than others, and to these he confined his experiments. He worked next on a wooden stool, then a chair, and so on, controlling larger and larger objects as his powers increased, until finally he resolved to animate this very table which I sold you the other day.

"The legs of that table exercised an extraordinary fascination over him. I distinctly remember what he said when he came to my shop one day and saw the table for the first time.

"'My word, Ibbetson,' he exclaimed, 'what a wonderful piece! You must let me take it to my study. If I can but succeed in projecting myself into it, beware! For I shall certainly be a tiger! Ah, but those lovely paws!' he sighed affectionately.

"He seemed so infatuated," continued the shopkeeper, "that I finally consented. And then, noticing how haggard he looked, and how his eyes glistened, I suggested that he'd been overdoing it, and that his study of spiritualism was doing him no good at all.

But he laughed, scoffed at my fears, and sent for the table, arranging for a stance the following night.



"Four of us were present: Percival, two other friends, and I. Shortly after midnight, Percival declared he would project himself. We watched him as he concentrated——"

Here the dealer shuddered, then continued: "He sat hunched forward, half crouching in his seat, almost like a beast about to spring. His eyes, fixed staringly on the table, were unseeing and glassy. Then, after an interminable pause, his lips began to quiver, and he muttered, as nearly as we could understand, 'I'm on the way . . . I'm coming as quickly as possible . . . I can't come any faster . . . Ah! . . .'

"He snarled, thumped the table furiously, yelled like some monstrous cat.

"My friends looked at me significantly; and I knew by their expressions that we agreed in our belief that Percival was mad. But before we could take any action, his eyes closed, the expression of unspeakable beastliness died out of his face, and he relapsed into a trance. I was still looking at him when my attention was abruptly called to the table. It began to throb, and on placing my ear close to it, I could distinctly hear something pulsing: it sounded exactly like the irregular beating of a heart. Then a jarring noise, and the table lunged forward, bounding and whirling furiously, leaping in one direction and another. A sudden lurch brought it violently against the professor’s chair, throwing him to the floor. The motion of the table



ceased when we switched on the lights. But too late. He was dead.

"We never knew whether the impact of the table killed him, or whether he was dead before the table touched him. A medical certificate was made, giving heart failure as the cause: for the less said about such matters the better.

"I resumed possession of the table," continued the dealer, "but every night about 12, that table began its antics. That sort of thing went on for weeks, ever increasing in violence. I sold it to you, thinking that you—since you didn't know its history and your house was in no way connected with the foregoing events—might put a stop to such unbelievable performances."

"I see your line of thought," I replied, "but it didn't work out that way, unfortunately. And my house, thanks to your fraud, is a wreck. And fraud it is, for you represented it to be a table, and not a saber-toothed tiger.”

"Quite right, sir," he answered contritely. "And I assure you——"

"By the way," interrupted Paul, "what brought you here at this time?"

"The police . . . you told them of the table night before last. They naturally investigated my shop and questioned me about the table, thinking some collector had followed it from the shop to this house. So I knew it was up to its old tricks."

"Now," I queried, "what are you going to do with it? You've bought it back from me; so I can't follow my inclination to chop it up and burn it."

"Neither can I," declared the dealer. "For if I did, I'd feel I had assassinated Professor Percival. So I'll keep it chained up in a brightly lighted room."





The Call of Cthulhu by H.P. Lovecraft

“The ring of worshippers moved in endless bacchanale between the ring of bodies and the ring of fire.”

"Of such great powers or beings there may be conceivably a survival . . . a survival of a hugely remote period when . . . consciousness was manifested, perhaps, in shapes and forms long since withdrawn before the tide of advancing humanity . . . forms of which poetry and legend alone have caught a flying memory and called them gods, monsters, mythical beings of all sorts and kinds. . . ."



—Algernon Blackwood.





Found among the papers of the late Francis Wayland Thurston, of Boston. 1. The Horror in Clay.



The most merciful thing in the world, I think, is the inability of the human mind to correlate all its contents. We live on a placid island of ignorance in the midst of black seas of infinity, and it was not meant that we should voyage far. The sciences, each straining in its own direction, have hitherto harmed us little; but some day the piecing together of dissociated knowledge will open up such terrifying vistas of reality, and of our frightful position therein, that we shall either go mad from the revelation or flee from the deadly light into the peace and safety of a new dark age.

Theosophists have guessed at the awesome grandeur of the cosmic cycle wherein our world and human race form transient incidents. They have hinted at strange survivals in terms which would freeze the blood if not masked by a bland optimism. But it is not from them that there came the single glimpse of forbidden eons which chills me when I think of it and maddens me when I dream of it. That glimpse, like all dread glimpses of truth, flashed out from an accidental piecing together of separated things—in this case an old newspaper item and the notes of a dead professor. I hope that no one else will accomplish this piecing out; certainly, if I live, I shall never knowingly supply a link in so hideous a chain. I think that the professor, too, intended to keep silent regarding the part he knew, and that he would have destroyed his notes had not sudden death seized him.

My knowledge of the thing began in the winter of 1926-27 with the death of my grand-uncle, George Gammell Angell, Professor Emeritus of Semitic languages in Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island. Professor Angell was widely known as an authority on ancient inscriptions, and had frequently been resorted to by the heads of prominent museums; so that his passing at the age of ninety-two may be recalled by many. Locally, interest was intensified by the obscurity of the cause of death. The professor had been stricken whilst returning from the Newport boat; falling suddenly, as witnesses said, after having been jostled by a nautical-looking negro who had come from one of the queer dark courts on the precipitous hillside which formed a short cut from the waterfront to the deceased’s home in Williams Street. Physicians were unable to find any visible disorder, but concluded after perplexed debate that some obscure lesion of the heart, induced by the brisk ascent of so steep a hill by so elderly a man, was responsible for the end. At the time I saw no reason to dissent from this dictum, but latterly I am inclined to wonder—and more than wonder.

As my granduncle’s heir and executor, for he died a childless widower, I was expected to go over his papers with some thoroughness; and for that purpose moved his entire set of files and boxes to my quarters in Boston. Much of the material which I correlated will be later published by the American Archeological Society, but there was one box which I found exceedingly puzzling, and which I felt much averse from showing to other eyes. It had been locked, and I did not find the key till it occurred to me to examine the personal ring which the professor carried always in his pocket. Then, indeed, I succeeded in opening it, but when I did so seemed only to be confronted by a greater and more closely locked barrier. For what could be the meaning of the queer clay bas-relief and the disjointed jottings, ramblings, and cuttings which I found? Had my uncle, in his latter years, become credulous of the most superficial impostures? I resolved to search out the eccentric sculptor responsible for this apparent disturbance of an old man’s peace of mind.

The bas-relief was a rough rectangle less than an inch thick and about five by six inches in area; obviously of modern origin. Its designs, however, were far from modern in atmosphere and suggestion; for, although the vagaries of cubism and futurism are many and wild, they do not often reproduce that cryptic regularity which lurks in prehistoric writing. And writing of some kind the bulk of these designs seemed certainly to be; though my memory, despite much familiarity with the papers and collections of my uncle, failed in any way to identify this particular species, or even hint at its remotest affiliations.

Above these apparent hieroglyphics was a figure of evidently pictorial intent, though its impressionistic execution forbade a very clear idea of its nature. It seemed to be a sort of monster, or symbol representing a monster, of a form which only a diseased fancy could conceive. If I say that my somewhat extravagant imagination yielded simultaneous pictures of an octopus, a dragon, and a human caricature, I shall not be unfaithful to the spirit of the thing. A pulpy, tentacled head surmounted a grotesque and scaly body with rudimentary wings; but it was the general outline of the whole which made it most shockingly frightful. Behind the figure was a vague suggestion of a Cyclopean architectural background.

The writing accompanying this oddity was, aside from a stack of press cuttings, in Professor Angell’s most recent hand; and made no pretense to literary style. What seemed to be the main document was headed “CTHULHU CULT” in characters painstakingly printed to avoid the erroneous reading of a word so unheard-of. This manuscript was divided into two sections, the first of which was headed “1925—Dream and Dream Work of H. A. Wilcox, 7 Thomas St., Providence, R. I.,” and the second, “Narrative of Inspector John R. Legrasse, 121 Bienville St., New Orleans, La., at 1908 A. A. S. Mtg.—Notes on Same, & Prof. Webb’s Acct.” The other manuscript papers were all brief notes, some of them accounts of the queer dreams of different persons, some of them citations from theosophical books and magazines (notably W. Scott-Eliott’s Atlantis and the Lost Lemuria), and the rest comments on long-surviving secret societies and hidden cults, with references to passages in such mythological and anthropological source-books as Frazer’s Golden Bough and Miss Murray’s Witch-Cult in Western Europe. The cuttings largely alluded to outré mental illnesses and outbreaks of group folly or mania in the spring of 1925.

The first half of the principal manuscript told a very peculiar tale. It appears that on March 1st, 1925, a thin, dark young man of neurotic and excited aspect had called upon Professor Angell bearing the singular clay bas-relief, which was then exceedingly damp and fresh. His card bore the name of Henry Anthony Wilcox, and my uncle had recognized him as the youngest son of an excellent family slightly known to him, who had latterly been studying sculpture at the Rhode Island School of Design and living alone at the Fleur-de-Lys Building near that institution. Wilcox was a precocious youth of known genius but great eccentricity, and had from childhood excited attention through the strange stories and odd dreams he was in the habit of relating. He called himself “psychically hypersensitive”, but the staid folk of the ancient commercial city dismissed him as merely “queer”. Never mingling much with his bind, he had dropped gradually from social visibility, and was now known only to a small group of esthetes from other towns. Even the Providence Art Club, anxious to preserve its conservatism, had found him quite hopeless.

On the occasion of the visit, ran the professor’s manuscript, the sculptor abruptly asked for the benefit of his host’s archeological knowledge in identifying the hieroglyphics on the bas-relief. He spoke in a dreamy, stilted manner which suggested pose and alienated sympathy; and my uncle showed some sharpness in replying, for the conspicuous freshness of the tablet implied kinship with anything but archeology. Young Wilcox’s rejoinder, which impressed my uncle enough to make him recall and record it verbatim, was of a fantastically poetic cast which must have typified his whole conversation, and which I have since found highly characteristic of him. He said, "It is new, indeed, for I made it last night in a dream of strange cities; and dreams are older than brooding Tyre, or the contemplative Sphinx, or garden-girdled Babylon."

It was then that he began that rambling tale which suddenly played upon a sleeping memory and won the fevered interest of my uncle. There had been a slight earthquake tremor the night before, the most considerable felt in New England for some years; and Wilcox's imagination had been keenly affected. Upon retiring, he had had an unprecedented dream of great Cyclopean cities of Titan blocks and sky-flung monoliths, all dripping with green ooze and sinister with latent horror. Hieroglyphics had covered the walls and pillars, and from some undetermined point below had come a voice that was not a voice; a chaotic sensation which only fancy could transmute into sound, but which he attempted to render by the almost unpronounceable jumble of letters, "Cthulhu fhtagn".

This verbal jumble was the key to the recollection which excited and disturbed Professor Angell. He questioned the sculptor with scientific minuteness; and studied with almost frantic intensity the bas-relief on which the youth had found himself working, chilled and clad only in his nightclothes, when waking had stolen bewilderingly over him. My uncle blamed his old age, Wilcox afterward said, for his slowness in recognizing both hieroglyphics and pictorial design. Many of his questions seemed highly out of place to his visitor, especially those which tried to connect the latter with strange cults or societies; and Wilcox could not understand the repeated promises of silence which he was offered in exchange for an admission of membership in some widespread mystical or paganly religious body. When Professor Angell became convinced that the sculptor was indeed ignorant of any cult or system of cryptic lore, he besieged his visitor with demands for future reports of dreams. This bore regular fruit, for after the first interview the manuscript records daily calls of the young man, during which he related startling fragments of nocturnal imagery whose burden was always some terrible Cyclopean vista of dark and dripping stone, with a subterrene voice or intelligence shouting monotonously in enigmatical sense-impacts uninscribable save as gibberish. The two sounds most frequently repeated are those rendered by the letters "Cthulhu" and "R'lyeh".

On March 23rd, the manuscript continued, Wilcox failed to appear; and inquiries at his quarters revealed that he had been stricken with an obscure sort of fever and taken to the home of his family in Waterman Street. He had cried out in the night, arousing several other artists in the building, and had manifested since then only alternations of unconsciousness and delirium. My uncle at once telephoned the family, and from that time forward kept close watch of the case; calling often at the Thayer Street office of Dr. Tobey, whom he learned to be in charge. The youth's febrile mind, apparently, was dwelling on strange things; and the doctor shuddered now and then as he spoke of them. They included not only a repetition of what he had formerly dreamed, but touched wildly on a gigantic thing "miles high" which walked or lumbered about. He at no time fully described this object, but occasional frantic words, as repeated by Dr. Tobey, convinced the professor that it must be identical with the nameless monstrosity he had sought to depict in his dream-sculpture. Reference to this object, the doctor added, was invariably a prelude to the young man’s subsidence into lethargy. His temperature, oddly enough, was not greatly above normal; but the whole condition was otherwise such as to suggest true fever rather than mental disorder.

On April 2nd at about 3 p. m. every trace of Wilcox’s malady suddenly ceased. He sat upright in bed, astonished to find himself at home and completely ignorant of what had happened in dream or reality since the night of March 22nd. Pronounced well by his physician, he returned to his quarters in three days; but to Professor Angell he was of no further assistance. All traces of strange dreaming had vanished with his recovery, and my uncle kept no record of his night-thoughts after a week of pointless and irrelevant accounts of thoroughly usual visions.

Here the first part of the manuscript ended, but references to certain of the scattered notes gave me much material for thought—so much, in fact, that only the ingrained skepticism then forming my philosophy can account for my continued distrust of the artist. The notes in question were those descriptive of the dreams of various persons covering the same period as that in which young Wilcox had had his strange visitations. My uncle, it seems, had quickly instituted a prodigiously far-flung body of inquiries amongst nearly all the friends whom he could question without impertinence, asking for nightly reports of their dreams, and the dates of any notable visions for some time past. The reception of his request seems to have been varied; but he must, at the very least, have received more responses than any ordinary man could have handled without a secretary. This original correspondence was not preserved, but his notes formed a thorough and really significant digest. Average people in society and business—New England’s traditional “salt of the earth”—gave an almost completely negative result, though scattered cases of uneasy but formless nocturnal impressions appear here and there, always between March 23rd and April 2nd—the period of young Wilcox’s delirium. Scientific men were little more affected, though four cases of vague description suggest fugitive glimpses of strange landscapes, and in one case there is mentioned a dread of something abnormal.

It was from the artists and poets that the pertinent answers came, and I know that panic would have broken loose had they been able to compare notes. As it was, lacking their original letters, I half suspected the compiler of having asked leading questions, or of having edited the correspondence in corroboration of what he had latently resolved to see. That is why I continued to feel that Wilcox, somehow cognizant of the old data which my uncle had possessed, had been imposing on the veteran scientist. These responses from esthetes told a disturbing tale. From February 28th to April 2nd a large proportion of them had dreamed very bizarre things, the intensity of the dreams being immeasurably the stronger during the period of the sculptor’s delirium. Over a fourth of those who reported anything, reported scenes and half-sounds not unlike those which Wilcox had described; and some of the dreamers confessed acute fear of the gigantic nameless thing visible toward the last. One case, which the note describes with emphasis, was very sad. The subject, a widely known architect with leanings toward theosophy and occultism, went violently insane on the date of young Wilcox’s seizure, and expired several months later after incessant screamings to be saved from some escaped denizen of hell. Had my uncle referred to these cases by name instead of merely by number, I should have attempted some corroboration and personal investigation; but as it was, I succeeded in tracing down only a few. All of these, however, bore out the notes in full. I have often wondered if all the objects of the professor’s questioning felt as puzzled as did this fraction. It is well that no explanation shall ever reach them.

The press cuttings, as I have intimated, touched on cases of panic, mania, and eccentricity during the given period. Professor Angell must have employed a cutting bureau, for the number of extracts was tremendous, and the sources scattered throughout the globe. Here was a nocturnal suicide in London, where a lone sleeper had leaped from a window after a shocking cry. Here likewise a rambling letter to the editor of a paper in South America, where a fanatic deduces a dire future from visions he has seen. A dispatch from California describes a theosophist colony as donning white robes en masse for some “glorious fulfilment” which never arrives, whilst items from India speak guardedly of serious native unrest toward the end of March. Voodoo orgies multiply in Haiti, and African outposts report ominous mutterings. American officers in the Philippines find certain tribes bothersome about this time, and New York policemen are mobbed by hysterical Levantines on the night of March 22-23. The west of Ireland, too, is full of wild rumor and legendry, and a fantastic painter named Ardois-Bonnot hangs a blasphemous Dream Landscape in the Paris spring salon of 1926. And so numerous are the recorded troubles in insane asylums that only a miracle can have stopped the medical fraternity from noting strange parallelisms, and drawing mystified conclusions. A weird bunch of cuttings, all told; and I can at this date scarcely envisage the callous rationalism with which I set them aside. But I was then convinced that young Wilcox had known of the older matters mentioned by the professor.





2. The Tale of Inspector Legrasse.



The older matters which had made the sculptor’s dream and bas-relief so significant to my uncle formed the subject of the second half of his long manuscript. Once before, it appears, Professor Angell had seen the hellish outlines of the nameless monstrosity, puzzled over the unknown hieroglyphics, and heard the ominous syllables which can be rendered only as “Cthulhu”; and all this in so stirring and horrible a connection that it is small wonder he pursued young Wilcox with queries and demands for data.

This earlier experience had come in 1908, seventeen years before, when the American Archeological Society held its annual meeting in St. Louis. Professor Angell, as befitted one of his authority and attainments, had had a prominent part in all the deliberations; and was one of the first to be approached by the several outsiders who took advantage of the convocation to offer questions for correct answering and problems for expert solution.

The chief of these outsiders, and in a short time the focus of interest for the entire meeting, was a commonplace-looking middle-aged man who had traveled all the way from New Orleans for certain special information unobtainable from any local source. His name was John Raymond Legrasse, and he was by profession an inspector of police. With him he bore the subject of his visit, a grotesque, repulsive, and apparently very ancient stone statuette whose origin he was at a loss to determine.

It must not be fancied that Inspector Legrasse had the least interest in archeology. On the contrary, his wish for enlightenment was prompted by purely professional considerations. The statuette, idol, fetish, or whatever it was, had been captured some months before in the wooded swamps south of New Orleans during a raid on a supposed voodoo meeting; and so singular and hideous were the rites connected with it, that the police could not but realize that they had stumbled on a dark cult totally unknown to them, and infinitely more diabolic than even the blackest of the African voodoo circles. Of its origin, apart from the erratic and unbelievable tales extorted from the captured members, absolutely nothing was to be discovered; hence the anxiety of the police for any antiquarian lore which might help them to place the frightful symbol, and through it track down the cult to its fountain-head.

Inspector Legrasse was scarcely prepared for the sensation which his offering created. One sight of the thing had been enough to throw the assembled men of science into a state of tense excitement, and they lost no time in crowding around him to gaze at the diminutive figure whose utter strangeness and air of genuinely abysmal antiquity hinted so potently at unopened and archaic vistas. No recognized school of sculpture had animated this terrible object, yet centuries and even thousands of years seemed recorded in its dim and greenish surface of unplaceable stone.

The figure, which was finally passed slowly from man to man for close and careful study, was between seven and eight inches in height, and of exquisitely artistic workmanship. It represented a monster of vaguely anthropoid outline, but with an octopus-like head whose face was a mass of feelers, a scaly, rubbery-looking body, prodigious claws on hind and fore feet, and long, narrow wings behind. This thing, which seemed instinct with a fearsome and unnatural malignancy, was of a somewhat bloated corpulence, and squatted evilly on a rectangular block or pedestal covered with undecipherable characters. The tips of the wings touched the back edge of the block, the seat occupied the center, whilst the long, curved claws of the doubled-up, crouching hind legs gripped the front edge and extended a quarter of the way down toward the bottom of the pedestal. The cephalopod head was bent forward, so that the ends of the facial feelers brushed the backs of huge forepaws which clasped the croucher’s elevated knees. The aspect of the whole was abnormally lifelike, and the more subtly fearful because its source was so totally unknown. Its vast, awesome, and incalculable age was unmistakable; yet not one link did it show with any known type of art belonging to civilization’s youth—or indeed to any other time.

Totally separate and apart, its very material was a mystery; for the soapy, greenish-black stone with its golden or iridescent flecks and striations resembled nothing familiar to geology or mineralogy. The characters along the base were equally baffling; and no member present, despite a representation of half the world’s expert learning in this field, could form the least notion of even their remotest linguistic kinship. They, like the subject and material, belonged to something horribly remote and distinct from mankind as we know it; something frightfully suggestive of old and unhallowed cycles of life in which our world and our conceptions have no part.



And yet, as the members severally shook their heads and confessed defeat at the inspector’s problem, there was one man in that gathering who suspected a touch of bizarre familiarity in the monstrous shape and writing, and who presently told with some diffidence of the odd trifle he knew. This person was the late William Channing Webb, professor of anthropology in Princeton University, and an explorer of no slight note.

Professor Webb had been engaged, forty-eight years before, in a tour of Greenland and Iceland in search of some Runic inscriptions which he failed to unearth; and whilst high up on the West Greenland coast had encountered a singular tribe or cult of degenerate Eskimos whose religion, a curious form of devil-worship, chilled him with its deliberate bloodthirstiness and repulsiveness. It was a faith of which other Eskimos knew little, and which they mentioned only with shudders, saying that it had come down from horribly ancient eons before ever the world was made. Besides nameless rites and human sacrifices there were certain queer hereditary rituals addressed to a supreme elder devil or tornasuk; and of this Professor Webb had taken a careful phonetic copy from an aged angekok or wizard-priest, expressing the sounds in Roman letters as best he knew how. But just now of prime significance was the fetish which this cult had cherished, and around which they danced when the aurora leaped high over the ice cliffs. It was, the professor stated, a very crude bas-relief of stone, comprising a hideous picture and some cryptic writing. And as far as he could tell, it was a rough parallel in all essential features of the bestial thing now lying before the meeting.

These data, received with suspense and astonishment by the assembled members, proved doubly exciting to Inspector Legrasse; and he began at once to ply his informant with questions. Having noted and copied an oral ritual among the swamp cult-worshipers his men had arrested, he besought the professor to remember as best he might the syllables taken down amongst the diabolist Eskimos. There then followed an exhaustive comparison of details, and a moment of really awed silence when both detective and scientist agreed on the virtual identity of the phrase common to two hellish rituals so many worlds of distance apart. What, in substance, both the Eskimo wizards and the Louisiana swamp-priests had chanted to their kindred idols was something very like this—the word-divisions being guessed at from traditional breaks in the phrase as chanted aloud:

"Ph’nglui mglw'nafh Cthulhu R’lyeh, wgah’nagl fhtagn.”



Legrasse had one point in advance of Professor Webb, for several among his mongrel prisoners had repeated to him what older celebrants had told them the words meant. This text, as given, ran something like this:

"In his house at R’lyeh dead Cthulhu waits dreaming.”



And now, in response to a general urgent demand, Inspector Legrasse related as fully as possible his experience with the swamp worshipers; telling a story to which I could see my uncle attached profound significance. It savored of the wildest dreams of myth-maker and theosophist, and disclosed an astonishing degree of cosmic imagination among such half-castes and pariahs as might be least expected to possess it.

On November 1st, 1907, there had come to New Orleans police a frantic summons from the swamp and lagoon country to the south. The squatters there, mostly primitive but good-natured descendants of Lafitte’s men, were in the grip of stark terror from an unknown thing which had stolen upon them in the night. It was voodoo, apparently, but voodoo of a more terrible sort than they had ever known; and some of their women and children had disappeared since the malevolent tom-tom had begun its incessant beating far within the black haunted woods where no dweller ventured. There were insane shouts and harrowing screams, soul-chilling chants and dancing devil-flames; and, the frightened messenger added, the people could stand it no more.

So a body of twenty police, filling two carriages and an automobile, had set out in the late afternoon with the shivering squatter as a guide. At the end of the passable road they alighted, and for miles splashed on in silence through the terrible cypress woods where day never came. Ugly roots and malignant hanging nooses of Spanish moss beset them, and now and then a pile of dank stones or fragments of a rotting wall intensified by its hint of morbid habitation a depression which every malformed tree and every fungous islet combined to create. At length the squatter settlement, a miserable huddle of huts, hove in sight; and hysterical dwellers ran out to cluster around the group of bobbing lanterns. The muffled beat of tom-toms was now faintly audible far, far ahead; and a curdling shriek came at infrequent intervals when the wind shifted. A reddish glare, too, seemed to filter through the pale undergrowth beyond endless avenues of forest night. Reluctant even to be left alone again, each one of the cowed squatters refused point-blank to advance another inch toward the scene of unholy worship, so Inspector Legrasse and his nineteen colleagues plunged on unguided into black arcades of horror that none of them had ever trod before.

The region now entered by the police was one of traditionally evil repute, substantially unknown and untraversed by white men. There were legends of a hidden lake unglimpsed by mortal sight, in which dwelt a huge, formless white polypous thing with luminous eyes; and squatters whispered that bat-winged devils flew up out of caverns in inner earth to worship it at midnight. They said it had been there before D’Iberville, before La Salle, before the Indians, and before even the wholesome beasts and birds of the woods. It was nightmare itself, and to see it was to die. But it made men dream, and so they knew enough to keep away. The present voodoo orgy was, indeed, on the merest fringe of this abhorred area, but that location was bad enough; hence perhaps the very place of the worship had terrified the squatters more than the shocking sounds and incidents.

Only poetry or madness could do justice to the noises heard by Legrasse’s men as they plowed on through the black morass toward the red glare and the muffled tom-toms. There are vocal qualities peculiar to men, and vocal qualities peculiar to beasts; and it is terrible to hear the one when the source should yield the other. Animal fury and orgiastic license here whipped themselves to demoniac heights by howls and squawking ecstasies that tore and reverberated through those nighted woods like pestilential tempests from the gulfs of hell. Now and then the less organized ululations would cease, and from what seemed a well-drilled chorus of hoarse voices would rise in singsong chant that hideous phrase or ritual:



"Ph’nglui mglw’nafh Cthulhu R’lyeh wgah’nagl fhtagn.”



Then the men, having reached a spot where the trees were thinner, came suddenly in sight of the spectacle itself. Four of them reeled, one fainted, and two were shaken into a frantic cry which the mad cacophony of the orgy fortunately deadened. Legrasse dashed swamp water on the face of the fainting man, and all stood trembling and nearly hypnotized with horror.

In a natural glade of the swamp stood a grassy island of perhaps an acre’s extent, clear of trees and tolerably dry. On this now leaped and twisted a more indescribable horde of human abnormality than any but a Sime or an Angarola could paint. Void of clothing, this hybrid spawn were braying, bellowing and writhing about a monstrous ring-shaped bonfire; in the center of which, revealed by occasional rifts in the curtain of flame, stood a great granite monolith some eight feet in height; on top of which, incongruous in its diminutiveness, rested the noxious carven statuette. From a wide circle of ten scaffolds set up at regular intervals with the flame-girt monolith as a center hung, head downward, the oddly marred bodies of the helpless squatters who had disappeared. It was inside this circle that the ring of worshipers jumped and roared, the general direction of the mass motion being from left to right in endless bacchanals between the ring of bodies and the ring of fire.

It may have been only imagination and it may have been only echoes which induced one of the men, an excitable Spaniard, to fancy he heard antiphonal responses to the ritual from some far and unillumined spot deeper within the wood of ancient legendry and horror. This man, Joseph D. Galvez, I later met and questioned; and he proved distractingly imaginative. He indeed went so far as to hint of the faint beating of great wings, and of a glimpse of shining eyes and a mountainous white bulk beyond the remotest trees—but I suppose he had been hearing too much native superstition.

Actually, the horrified pause of the men was of comparatively brief duration. Duty came first; and although there must have been nearly a hundred mongrel celebrants in the throng, the police relied on their firearms and plunged determinedly into the nauseous rout. For five minutes the resultant din and chaos were beyond description. Wild blows were struck, shots were fired, and escapes were made; but in the end Legrasse was able to count some forty-seven sullen prisoners, whom he forced to dress in haste and fall into line between two rows of policemen. Five of the worshipers lay dead, and two severely wounded ones were carried away on improvised stretchers by their fellow-prisoners. The image on the monolith, of course, was carefully removed and carried back by Legrasse.

Examined at headquarters after a trip of intense strain and weariness, the prisoners all proved to be men of a very low, mixed-blooded, and mentally aberrant type. Most were seamen, and a sprinkling of negroes and mulattoes, largely West Indians or Brava Portuguese from the Cape Verde Islands, gave a coloring of voodooism to the heterogeneous cult. But before many questions were asked, it became manifest that something far deeper and older than negro fetishism was involved. Degraded and ignorant as they were, the creatures held with surprizing consistency to the central idea of their loathsome faith.

They worshiped, so they said, the Great Old Ones who lived ages before there were any men, and who came to the young world out of the sky. Those Old Ones were gone now, inside the earth and under the sea; but their dead bodies had told their secrets in dreams to the first man, who formed a cult which had never died. This was that cult, and the prisoners said it had always existed and always would exist, hidden in distant wastes and dark places all over the world until the time when the great priest Cthulhu, from his dark house in the mighty city of R’lyeh under the waters, should rise and bring the earth again beneath his sway. Some day he would call, when the stars were ready, and the secret cult would always be waiting to liberate him.

Meanwhile no more must be told. There was a secret which even torture could not extract. Mankind was not absolutely alone among the conscious things of earth, for shapes came out of the dark to visit the faithful few. But these were not the Great Old Ones. No man had ever seen the Old Ones. The carven idol was great Cthulhu, but none might say whether or not the others were precisely like him. No one could read the old writing now, but things were told by word of mouth. The chanted ritual was not the secret—that was never spoken aloud, only whispered. The chant meant only this: “In his house at R’lyeh dead Cthulhu waits dreaming.”

Only two of the prisoners were found sane enough to be hanged, and the rest were committed to various institutions. All denied a part in the ritual murders, and averred that the killing had been done by Black-winged Ones which had come to them from their immemorial meeting-place in the haunted wood. But of those mysterious allies no coherent account could ever be gained. What the police did extract came mainly from an immensely aged mestizo named Castro, who claimed to have sailed to strange ports and talked with undying leaders of the cult in the mountains of China.

Old Castro remembered bits of hideous legend that paled the speculations of theosophists and made man and the world seem recent and transient indeed. There had been eons when other Things ruled on the earth, and They had had great cities. Remains of Them, he said the deathless Chinamen had told him, were still to be found as Cyclopean stones on islands in the Pacific. They all died vast epochs of time before man came, but there were arts which could revive Them when the stars had come round again to the right positions in the cycle of eternity. They had, indeed, come themselves from the stars, and brought Their images with Them.

These Great Old Ones, Castro continued, were not composed altogether of flesh and blood. They had shape—for did not this star-fashioned image prove it?—but that shape was not made of matter. When the stars were right, They could plunge from world to world through the sky; but when the stars were wrong, They could not live. But although They no longer lived, They would never really die. They all lay in stone houses in Their great city of R’lyeh, preserved by the spells of mighty Cthulhu for a glorious resurrection when the stars and the earth might once more be ready for Them. But at that time some force from outside must serve to liberate Their bodies. The spells that preserved Them intact likewise prevented Them from making an initial move, and They could only lie awake in the dark and think whilst uncounted millions of years rolled by. They knew all that was occurring in the universe, for Their mode of speech was transmitted thought. Even now They talked in Their tombs. When, after infinities of chaos, the first men came, the Great Old Ones spoke to the sensitive among them by molding their dreams; for only thus could Their language reach the fleshly minds of mammals.

Then, whispered Castro, those first men formed the cult around small idols which the Great Ones showed them; idols brought in dim eras from dark stars. That cult would never die till the stars came right again, and the secret priests would take great Cthulhu from His tomb to revive His subjects and resume His rule of earth. The time would be easy to know, for then mankind would have become as the Great Old Ones; free and wild and beyond good and evil, with laws and morals thrown aside and all men shouting and killing and reveling in joy. Then the liberated Old Ones would teach them new ways to shout and kill and revel and enjoy themselves, and all the earth would flame with a holocaust of ecstasy and freedom. Meanwhile the cult, by appropriate rites, must keep alive the memory of those ancient ways and shadow forth the prophecy of their return.

In the elder time chosen men had talked with the entombed Old Ones in dreams, but then something had happened. The great stone city R’lyeh, with its monoliths and sepulchers, had sunk beneath the waves; and the deep waters, full of the one primal mystery through which not even thought can pass, had cut off the spectral intercourse. But memory never died, and high priests said that the city would rise again when the stars were right. Then came out of the earth the black spirits of earth, moldy and shadowy, and full of dim rumors picked up in caverns beneath forgotten sea-bottoms. But of them old Castro dared not speak much. He cut himself off hurriedly, and no amount of persuasion or subtlety could elicit more in this direction. The size of the Old Ones, too, he curiously declined to mention. Of the cult, he said that he thought the center lay amid the pathless deserts of Arabia, where Irem, the City of Pillars, dreams hidden and untouched. It was not allied to the European witch-cult, and was virtually unknown beyond its members. No book had ever really hinted of it, though the deathless Chinamen said that there were double meanings in the Necronomicon of the mad Arab Abdul Alhazred which the initiated might read as they chose, especially the much-discussed couplet:

“That is not dead which can eternal lie,

And with strange eons even death may die.”





Legrasse, deeply impressed and not a little bewildered, had inquired in vain concerning the historic affiliations of the cult. Castro, apparently, had told the truth when he said that it was wholly secret. The authorities at Tulane University could shed no light upon either cult or image, and now the detective had come to the highest authorities in the country and met with no more than the Greenland tale of Professor Webb.

The feverish interest aroused at the meeting by Legrasse’s tale, corroborated as it was by the statuette, is echoed in the subsequent correspondence of those who attended; although scant mention occurs in the formal publication of the society. Caution is the first care of those accustomed to face occasional charlatanry and imposture. Legrasse for some time lent the image to Professor Webb, but at the latter’s death it was returned to him and remains in his possession, where I viewed it not long ago. It is truly a terrible thing, and unmistakably akin to the dream-sculpture of young Wilcox.

That my uncle was excited by the tale of the sculptor I did not wonder, for what thoughts must arise upon hearing, after a knowledge of what Legrasse had learned of the cult, of a sensitive young man who had dreamed not only the the figure and exact hieroglyphics of the swamp-found image and the Greenland devil tablet, but had come in his dreams upon at least three of the precise words of the formula uttered alike by Eskimo diabolists and mongrel Louisianans? Professor Angell’s instant start on an investigation of the utmost thoroughness was eminently natural; though privately I suspected young Wilcox of having heard of the cult in some indirect way, and of having invented a series of dreams to heighten and continue the mystery at my uncle’s expense. The dream-narratives and cuttings collected by the professor were, of course, strong corroboration; but the rationalism of my mind and the extravagance of the whole subject led me to adopt what I thought the most sensible conclusions. So, after thoroughly studying the manuscript again and correlating the theosophical and anthropological notes with the cult narrative of Legrasse, I made a trip to Providence to see the sculptor and give him the rebuke I thought proper for so boldly imposing upon a learned and aged man.

Wilcox still lived alone in the Fleur-de-Lys Building in Thomas Street, a hideous Victorian imitation of Seventeenth Century Breton architecture which flaunts its stuccoed front amidst the lovely Colonial houses on the ancient hill, and under the very shadow of the finest Georgian steeple in America. I found him at work in his rooms, and at once conceded from the specimens scattered about that his genius is indeed profound and authentic. He will, I believe, be heard from sometime as one of the great decadents; for he has crystallized in clay and will one day mirror in marble those nightmares and fantasies which Arthur Machen evokes in prose, and Clark Ashton Smith makes visible in verse and in painting.

Dark, frail, and somewhat unkempt in aspect, he turned languidly at my knock and asked me my business without rising. When I told him who I was, he displayed some interest; for my uncle had excited his curiosity in probing his strange dreams, yet had never explained the reason for the study. I did not enlarge his knowledge in this regard, but sought with some subtlety to draw him out.

In a short time I became convinced of his absolute sincerity, for he spoke of the dreams in a manner none could mistake. They and their subconscious residuum had influenced his art profoundly, and he showed me a morbid statue whose contours almost made me shake with the potency of its black suggestion. He could not recall having seen the original of this thing except in his own dream bas-relief, but the outlines had formed themselves insensibly under his hands. It was, no doubt, the giant shape he had raved of in delirium. That he really knew nothing of the hidden cult, save from what my uncle’s relentless catechism had let fall, he soon made clear; and again I strove to think of some way in which he could possibly have received the weird impressions.



He talked of his dreams in a strangely poetic fashion; making me see with terrible vividness the damp Cyclopean city of slimy green stone—whose geometry, he oddly said, was all wrong—and hear with frightened expectancy the ceaseless, half-mental calling from underground: “Cthulhu fhtagn,” “Cthulhu fhtagn.”

These words had formed part of that dread ritual which told of dead Cthulhu’s dream-vigil in his stone vault at R’lyeh, and I felt deeply moved despite my rational beliefs. Wilcox, I was sure, had heard of the cult in some casual way, and had soon forgotten it amidst the mass of his equally weird reading and imagining. Later, by virtue of its sheer impressiveness, it had found subconscious expression in dreams, in the bas-relief, and in the terrible statue I now beheld; so that his imposture upon my uncle had been a very innocent one. The youth was of a type, at once slightly affected and slightly ill-mannered, which I could never like; but I was willing enough now to admit both his genius and his honesty. I took leave of him amicably, and wish him all the success his talent promises.

The matter of the cult still remained to fascinate me, and at times I had visions of personal fame from researches into its origin and connections. I visited New Orleans, talked with Legrasse and others of that old-time raiding-party, saw the frightful image, and even questioned such of the mongrel prisoners as still survived. Old Castro, unfortunately, had been dead for some years. What I now heard so graphically at first hand, though it was really no more than a detailed confirmation of what my uncle had written, excited me afresh; for I felt sure that I was on the track of a very real, very secret, and very ancient religion whose discovery would make me an anthropologist of note. My attitude was still one of absolute materialism, as I wish it still were, and I discounted with almost inexplicable perversity the coincidence of the dream notes and odd cuttings collected by Professor Angell.

One thing which I began to suspect, and which I now fear I know, is that my uncle’s death was far from natural. He fell on a narrow hill street leading up from an ancient waterfront swarming with foreign mongrels, after a careless push from a negro sailor. I did not forget the mixed blood and marine pursuits of the cult-members in Louisiana, and would not be surprized to learn of secret methods and poison needles as ruthless and as anciently known as the cryptic rites and beliefs. Legrasse and his men, it is true, have been let alone; but in Norway a certain seaman who saw things is dead. Might not the deeper inquiries of my uncle after encountering the sculptor’s data have come to sinister ears? I thing Professor Angell died because he knew too much, or because he was likely to learn too much. Whether I shall go as he did remains to be seen, for I have learned much now.





3. The Madness from the Sea.



If heaven ever wishes to grant me a boon, it will be a total effacing of the results of a mere chance which fixed my eye on a certain stray piece of shelf-paper. It was nothing on which I would naturally have stumbled in the course of my daily round, for it was an old number of an Australian journal, Sydney Bulletin for April 18, 1925. It had escaped even the cutting bureau which had at the time of its issuance been avidly collecting material for my uncle’s research.

I had largely given over my inquiries into what Professor Angell called the “Cthulhu Cult,” and was visiting a learned friend of Paterson, New Jersey; the curator of a local museum and a mineralogist of note. Examining one day the reserve specimens roughly set on the storage shelves in a rear room of the museum, my eye was caught by an odd picture in one of the old papers spread beneath the stones. It was the Sydney Bulletin I have mentioned, for my friend has wide affiliations in all conceivable foreign parts; and the picture was a halftone cut of a hideous stone image almost identical with that which Legrasse had found in the swamp.

Eagerly clearing the sheet of its precious contents, I scanned the item in detail; and was disappointed to find it of only moderate length. What it suggested, however, was of portentous significance to my flagging quest; and I carefully tore it out for immediate action. It read as follows:





MYSTERY DERELICT FOUND AT SEA





* * *





Vigilant Arrives With Helpless Armed New Zealand Yacht in Tow. One Survivor and Dead Man Found Aboard. Tale of Desperate Battle and Deaths at Sea. Rescued Seaman Refuses Particulars of Strange Experience. Odd Idol Found in His Possession. Inquiry to Follow.





* * *





The Morrison Co.’s freighter Vigilant, bound from Valparaiso, arrived this morning at its wharf in Darling Harbour, having in tow the battled and disabled but heavily armed steam yacht Alert of Dunedin, N. Z., which was sighted April 12th in S. Latitude 34° 21', W. Longitude 152° 17', with one living and one dead man aboard.

The Vigilant left Valparaiso March 25th, and on April 2d was driven considerably south of her course by exceptionally heavy storms and monster waves. On April 12th the derelict was sighted; and though apparently deserted, was found upon boarding to contain one survivor in a half-delirious condition and one man who had evidently been dead for more than a week.

The living man was clutching a horrible stone idol of unknown origin, about a foot in height, regarding whose nature authorities at Sydney University, the Royal Society, and the Museum in College Street all profess complete bafflement, and which the survivor says he found in the cabin of the yacht, in a small carved shrine of common pattern.

This man, after recovering his senses, told an exceedingly strange story of piracy and slaughter. He is Gustaf Johansen, a Norwegian of some intelligence, and had been second mate of the two-masted schooner Emma of Auckland, which sailed for Callao February 20th, with a complement of eleven men.

The Emma, he says, was delayed and thrown widely south of her course by the great storm of March 1st, and on March 2nd, in S. Latitude 49° 51', W. Longitude 128° 34', encountered the Alert, manned by a queer and evil-looking crew of Kanakas and half-castes. Being ordered peremptorily to turn back, Capt. Collins refused; whereupon the strange crew began to fire savagely and without warning upon the schooner with a peculiarly heavy batter of brass cannon forming part of the yacht’s equipment.

The Emma’s men showed fight, says the survivor, and though the schooner began to sink from shots beneath the waterline they managed to heave alongside their enemy and board her, grappling with the savage crew on the yacht’s deck, and being forced to kill them all, the number being slightly superior, because of their particularly abhorrent and desperate though rather clumsy mode of fighting.

Three of the Emma’s men, including Capt. Collins and First Mate Green, were killed: and the remaining eight under Second Mate Johansen proceeded to navigate the captured yacht, going ahead in their original direction to see if any reason for their ordering back had existed.

The next day, it appears, they raised and landed on a small island, although none is known to exist in that part of the ocean; and six of the men somehow died ashore, though Johansen is queerly reticent about this part of his story and speaks only of their falling into a rock chasm.

Later, it seems, he and one companion boarded the yacht and tried to manage her, but were beaten about by the storm of April 2nd.



From that time till his rescue on the 12th, the man remembers little, and he does not even recall when William Briden, his companion, died. Briden's death reveals no apparent cause, and was probably due to excitement or exposure.

Cable advices from Dunedin report that the Alert was well known there as an island trader, and bore an evil reputation along the waterfront. It was owned by a curious group of half-castes whose frequent meetings and night trips to the woods attracted no little curiosity; and it had set sail in great haste just after the storm and earth tremors of of March 1st.

Our Auckland correspondent gives the Emma and her crew an excellent reputation, and Johansen is described as a sober and worthy man.

The admiralty will institute an inquiry on the whole matter beginning tomorrow, at which every effort will be made to induce Johansen to speak more freely than he has done hitherto.





This was all, together with the picture of the hellish image; but what a train of ideas it started in my mind! Here were new treasuries of data on the Cthulhu Cult, and evidence that it had strange interests at sea as well as on land. What motive prompted the hybrid crew to order back the Emma as they sailed about with their hideous idol? What was the unknown island on which six of the Emma’s crew had died, and about which the mate Johansen was so secretive? What had the vice-admiralty’s investigation brought out, and what was known of the noxious cult in Dunedin? And most marvelous of all, what deep and more than natural linkage of dates was this which gave a malign and now undeniable significance to the various turns of events so carefully noted by my uncle.

March 1st—our February 28th according to the International Date Line—the earthquake and storm had come. From Dunedin the Alert and her noisome crew had darted eagerly forth as if imperiously summoned, and on the other side of the earth poets and artists had begun to dream of a strange, dank Cyclopean city whilst a young sculptor had molded in his sleep the form of the dreaded Cthulhu. March 23rd the crew of the Emma landed on an unknown island and left six men dead; and on that date the dreams of sensitive men assumed a heightened vividness and darkened with dread of a giant monster’s malign pursuit, whilst an architect had gone mad and a sculptor had lapsed suddenly into delirium! And what of this storm of April 2nd—the date on which all dreams of the dank city ceased, and Wilcox emerged unharmed from the bondage of strange fever? What of all this—and of those hints of old Castro about the sunken, star-born Old Ones and their coming reign; their faithful cult and their mastery of dreams? Was I tottering on the brink of cosmic horrors beyond man’s power to bear? If so, they must be horrors of the mind alone, for in some way the second of April had put a stop to whatever monstrous menace had begun its siege of mankind’s soul.

That evening, after a day of hurried cabling and arranging, I bade my host adieu and took a train for San Francisco. In less than a month I was in Dunedin; where, however, I found that little was known of the strange cult-members who had lingered in the old sea taverns. Waterfront scum was far too common for special mention; though there was vague talk about one inland trip these mongrels had made, during which faint drumming and red flame were noted on the distant hills.

In Auckland I learned that Johansen had returned with yellow hair turned white after a perfunctory and inconclusive questioning at Sydney, and had thereafter sold his cottage in West Street and sailed with his wife to his old home in Oslo. Of his stirring experience he would tell his friends no more than he had told the admiralty officials, and all they could do was to give me his Oslo address.

After that I went to Sydney and talked profitlessly with seamen and members of the vice-admiralty court. I saw the Alert, now sold and in commercial use, at Circular Quay in Sydney Cove, but gained nothing from its non-committal bulk. The crouching image with its cuttlefish head, dragon body, scaly wings, and hieroglyphed pedestal, was preserved in the Museum at Hyde Park; and I studied it long and well, finding it a thing of balefully exquisite workmanship, and with the same utter mystery, terrible antiquity, and unearthly strangeness of material which I had noted in Legrasse’s smaller specimen. Geologists, the curator told me, had found it a monstrous puzzle; for they vowed that the world held no rock like it. Then I thought with a shudder of what old Castro had told Legrasse about the primal Great Ones: “They had come from the stars, and had brought Their images with Them.”

Shaken with such a mental revolution as I had never before known, I now resolved to visit Mate Johansen in Oslo. Sailing for London, I re-embarked at once for the Norwegian capital; and one autumn day landed at the trim wharves in the shadow of the Egeberg.

Johansen’s address, I discovered, lay in the Old Town of King Harold Haardrada, which kept alive the name of Oslo during all the centuries that the greater city masqueraded as “Christiania.” I made the brief trip by taxicab, and knocked with palpitant heart at the door of a neat and ancient building with plastered front. A sad-faced woman in black answered my summons, and I was stung with disappointment when she told me in halting English that Gustaf Johansen was no more.

He had not long survived his return, said his wife, for the doings at sea in 1925 had broken him. He had told her no more than he had told the public, but had left a long manuscript—of “technical matters” as he said—written in English, evidently in order to safeguard her from the peril of casual perusal. During a walk through a narrow lane near the Gothenburg dock, a bundle of papers falling from an attic window had knocked him down. Two Lascar sailors at once helped him to his feet, but before the ambulance could reach him he was dead. Physicians found no adequate cause for the end, and laid it to heart trouble and a weakened constitution.

I now felt gnawing at my vitals that dark terror which will never leave me till I, too, am at rest; “accidentally” or otherwise. Persuading the widow that my connection with her husband’s “technical matters” was sufficient to entitle me to his manuscript, I bore the document away and began to read it on the London boat.

It was a simple, rambling thing—a naive sailor’s effort at a post-facto diary—and strove to recall day by day that last awful voyage. I can not attempt to transcribe it verbatim in all its cloudiness and redundance, but I will tell its gist enough to show why the sound of the water against the vessel’s sides became so unendurable to me that I stopped my ears with cotton.

Johansen, thank God, did not know quite all, even though he saw the city and the Thing, but I shall never sleep calmly again when I think of the horrors that lurk ceaselessly behind life in time and in space, and of those unhallowed blasphemies from elder stars which dream beneath the sea, known and favored by a nightmare cult ready and eager to loose them on the world whenever another earthquake shall heave their monstrous stone city again to the sun and air.

Johansen’s voyage had begun just as he told it to the vice-admiralty. The Emma, in ballast, had cleared Auckland on February 20th, and had felt the full force of that earthquake-born tempest which must have heaved up from the sea-bottom the horrors that filled men’s dreams. Once more under control, the ship was making good progress when held up by the Alert on March 22nd, and I could feel the mate’s regret as he wrote of her bombardment and sinking. Of the swarthy cult-fiends on the Alert he speaks with significant horror. There was some peculiarly abominable quality about them which made their destruction seem almost a duty, and Johansen shows ingenuous wonder at the charge of ruthlessness brought against his party during the proceedings of the court of inquiry. Then, driven ahead by curiosity in their captured yacht under Johansen’s command, the men sight a great stone pillar sticking out of the sea, and in S. Latitude 47° 9', W. Longitude 126° 43' come upon a coastline of mingled mud, ooze, and weedy Cyclopean masonry which can be nothing less than the tangible substance of earth’s supreme terror—the nightmare corpse-city of R’lyeh, that was built in measureless eons behind history by the vast, loathsome shapes that seeped down from the dark stars. There lay great Cthulhu and his hordes, hidden in green slimy vaults and sending out at last, after cycles incalculable, the thoughts that spread fear to the dreams of the sensitive and called imperiously to the faithful to come on a pilgrimage of liberation and restoration. All this Johansen did not suspect, but God knows he soon saw enough!

I suppose that only a single mountain-top, the hideous monolith-crowned citadel whereon great Cthulhu was buried, actually emerged from the waters. When I think of the extent of all that may be brooding down there I almost wish to kill myself forthwith. Johansen and his men were awed by the cosmic majesty of this dripping Babylon of elder demons, and must have guessed without guidance that it was nothing of this or of any sane planet. Awe at the unbelievable size of the greenish stone blocks, at the dizzying height of the great carven monolith, and at the stupefying identity of the colossal statues and bas-reliefs with the queer image found in the shrine on the Alert, is poignantly visible in every line of the mate’s frightened description.

Without knowing what futurism is like, Johansen achieved something very close to it when he spoke of the city; for instead of describing any definite structure or building, he dwells only on the broad impressions of vast angles and stone surfaces—surfaces too great to belong to anything right or proper for this earth, and impious with horrible images and hieroglyphs. I mention his talk about angles because it suggests something Wilcox had told me of his awful dreams. He had said that the geometry of the dream-place he saw was abnormal, non-Euclidean, and loathsomely redolent of spheres and dimensions apart from ours. Now an unlettered seaman felt the same thing whilst gazing at the terrible reality.

Johansen and his men landed at a sloping mud-bank on this monstrous Acropolis, and clambered slipperily up over titan oozy blocks which could have been no mortal staircase. The very sun of heaven seemed distorted when viewed through the polarizing miasma welling out from this sea-soaked perversion, and twisted menace and suspense lurked leeringly in those crazily elusive angles of carven rock where a second glance showed concavity after the first showed convexity.

Something very like fright had come over all the explorers before anything more definite than rock and ooze and weed was seen. Each would have fled had he not feared the scorn of the others, and it was only half-heartedly that they searched—vainly, as it proved—for some portable souvenir to bear away.

It was Rodriguez the Portuguese who climbed up the foot of the monolith and shouted of what he had found. The rest followed him, and looked curiously at the immense carved door with the now familiar squid-dragon bas-relief. It was, Johansen said, like a great barn-door; and they all felt that it was a door because of the ornate lintel, threshold, and jambs around it, though they could not decide whether it lay flat like a trap-door or slantwise like an outside cellar-door. As Wilcox would have said, the geometry of the place was all wrong. One could not be sure that the sea and the ground were horizontal, hence the relative position of everything else seemed fantasmally variable.

Briden pushed at the stone in several places without result. Then Donovan felt over it delicately around the edge, pressing each point separately as he went. He climbed interminably along the grotesque stone molding—that is, one would call it climbing if the thing was not after all horizontal—and the men wondered how any door in the universe could be so vast. Then, very softly and slowly, the acre-great panel began to give inward at the top; and they saw that it was balanced.

Donovan slid or somehow propelled himself down or along the jamb and rejoined his fellows, and everyone watched the queer recession of the monstrously carven portal. In this fantasy of prismatic distortion it moved anomalously in a diagonal way, so that all the rules of matter and perspective seemed upset.

The aperture was black with a darkness almost material. That tenebrousness was indeed a positive quality; for it obscured such parts of the inner walls as ought to have been revealed, and actually burst forth like smoke from its eon-long imprisonment, visibly darkening the sun as it slunk away into the shrunken and gibbous sky on flapping membranous wings. The odor arising from the newly opened depths was intolerable, and at length the quickeared Hawkins thought he heard a nasty, slopping sound down there. Everyone listened, and everyone was listening still when It lumbered slobberingly into sight and gropingly squeezed Its gelatinous green immensity through the black doorway into the tainted outside air of that poison city of madness.

Poor Johansen’s handwriting almost gave out when he wrote of this. Of the six men who never reached the ship, he thinks two perished of pure fright in that accursed instant. The Thing can not be described—there is no language for such abysms of shrieking and immemorial lunacy, such eldritch contradictions of all matter, force, and cosmic order. A mountain walked or stumbled. God! What wonder that across the earth a great architect went mad, and poor Wilcox raved with fever in that telepathic instant? The Thing of the idols, the green, sticky spawn of the stars, had awaked to claim his own. The stars were right again, and what an age-old cult had failed to do by design, a band of innocent sailors had done by accident. After vigintillions of years great Cthulhu was loose again, and ravening for delight.

Three men were swept up by the flabby claws before anybody turned. God rest them, if there be any rest in the universe. They were Donovan, Guerrera and Angstrom. Parker slipped as the other three were plunging frenziedly over endless vistas of green-crusted rock to the boat, and Johansen swears he was swallowed up by an angle of masonry which shouldn’t have been there; an angle which was acute, but behaved as if it were obtuse. So only Briden and Johansen reached the boat, and pulled desperately for the Alert as the mountainous monstrosity flopped down the slimy stones and hesitated floundering at the edge of the water.

Steam had not been suffered to go down entirely, despite the departure of all hands for the shore; and it was the work of only a few moments of feverish rushing up and down between wheels and engines to get the Alert under way. Slowly, amidst the distorted horrors of that indescribable scene, she began to churn the lethal waters; whilst on the masonry of that charnel shore that was not of earth the titan Thing from the stars slavered and gibbered like Polypheme cursing the fleeing ship of Odysseus. Then, bolder than the storied Cyclops, great Cthulhu slid greasily into the water and began to pursue with vast wave-raising strokes of cosmic potency. Briden looked back and went mad, laughing shrilly as he kept on laughing at intervals till death found him one night in the cabin whilst Johansen was wandering deliriously.

But Johansen had not given out yet. Knowing that the Thing could surely overtake the Alert until steam was fully up, he resolved on a desperate chance; and, setting the engine for full speed, ran lightning-like on deck and reversed the wheel. There was a mighty eddying and foaming in the noisome brine, and as the steam mounted higher and higher the brave Norwegian drove his vessel head on against the pursuing jelly which rose above the unclean froth like the stern of a demon galleon. The awful squid-head with writhing feelers came nearly up to the bowsprit of the sturdy yacht, but Johansen drove on relentlessly.

There was a bursting as of an exploding bladder, a slushy nastiness as of a cloven sunfish, a stench as of a thousand opened graves, and a sound that the chronicler would not put on paper. For an instant the ship was befouled by an acrid and blinding green cloud, and then there was only a venomous seething astern; where—God in heaven!—the scattered plasticity of that nameless sky-spawn was nebulously recombining in its hateful original form, whilst its distance widened every second as the Alert gained impetus from its mounting steam.

That was all. After that Johansen only brooded over the idol in the cabin and attended to a few matters of food for himself and the laughing maniac by his side. He did not try to navigate after the first bold flight, for the reaction had taken something out of his soul. Then came the storm of April 2nd, and a gathering of the clouds about his consciousness. There is a sense of spectral whirling through liquid gulfs of infinity, of dizzying rides through reeling universes on a comet’s tail, and of hysterical plunges from the pit to the moon and from the moon back again to the pit, all livened by a cachinnating chorus of the distorted, hilarious elder gods and the green, bat-winged mocking imps of Tartarus.

Out of that dream came rescue—the Vigilant, the vice-admiralty court, the streets of Dunedin, and the long voyage back home to the old house by the Egeberg. He could not tell—they would think him mad. He would write of what he knew before death came, but his wife must not guess. Death would be a boon if only it could blot out the memories.

That was the document I read, and now I have placed it in the tin box beside the bas-relief and the papers of Professor Angell. With it shall go this record of mine—this test of my own sanity, wherein is pieced together that which I hope may never be pieced together again. I have looked upon all that the universe has to hold of horror, and even the skies of spring and the flowers of summer must ever afterward be poison to me. But I do not think my life will be long. As my uncle went, as poor Johansen went, so I shall go. I know too much, and the cult still lives.

Cthulhu still lives, too, I suppose, again in that chasm of stone which has shielded him since the sun was young. His accursed city is sunken once more, for the Vigilant sailed over the spot after the April storm; but his ministers on earth still bellow and prance and slay around idol-capped monoliths in lonely places. He must have been trapped by the sinking whilst within his black abyss, or else the world would by now be screaming with fright and frenzy. Who knows the end? What has risen may sink, and what has sunk may rise. Loathsomeness waits and dreams in the deep, and decay spreads over the tottering cities of men. A time will come—but I must not and can not think! Let me pray that, if I do not survive this manuscript, my executors may put caution before audacity and see that it meets no other eye.





The Shadow on the Moor by Stuart Strauss

“Up he went, until he could plainly see the fearful carvings on the altar.”

The stillness of the room was broken only by the clicking of a typewriter, which went on uninterruptedly for some time. Finally a man arose, and, stretching himself, yawned and spoke to his companion.

“It’s too hot to work tonight, and, besides, who could write a horror story on a night like this?” The other man raised his eyes from his book.

“I suppose it should be thundering, lightening, and raining torrents, with a wind that whistles around the housetops. Come on, let’s hit the hay, Jerry.”

When he had finished his preparations for bed, Jerry Jarvais slipped out upon the balcony of the inn for a final cigaret. He stood there silent, gazing off across the moor. The night was very still, and the moon flooded everything with a soft, silvery light that brought all out in a marble whiteness—a softness that hid the grime and dirt, and gave the commonplace an air of beauty unseen by the glare of day. There was only the faintest hint of a breeze that, soft as midnight velvet, whipped his dressing-gown around his legs and made the trees bend ever so gracefully, ever so slightly, seeming to bow and quiver like dancers on a polished ballroom floor.

Jarvais was silent, rapt, alone and lost in the beauty of the night. For a long time he had heard of this section of desolate country with its memories and mementos of a lost race. No other part of England held its savage charm. Jarvais had come here seeking new material, new color, and new ideas. He had been stagnating. Before, to him, mystery had meant the East—the Orient—but here at home in the quiet of old England was more mystery—more allure than he had ever known.

Far away across the moonlit bleakness of the moor were the ruins—that mass of toppled columns and rough-hewn slabs set in crude circles. The stones glistened mistily, and threw huge, sprawling shadows beneath them like pools of blood on a silver tray.

Broken only by the whispering of the trees, the stillness gripped Jarvais; held him tense, expectant, waiting. But for what? For there was only stillness and the soft rustle of the night wind among the trees.

As Jarvais was about to toss his finished cigaret over the balcony rail and return to his room, he paused and glanced sharply across the empty lawn. He had seen something—he did not know what. There was movement, where but a moment before had been naught but moonlit emptiness. He had heard nothing, but he was conscious of another presence. He looked out again across the moor. All was as before, but here beneath the balcony was something, someone. He had caught but the fleeting glimpse of a shadow moving, where before had been but nothingness.

It was a shadow—the dim silhouette of a woman. The time was long past midnight, and the inhabitants of the inn were all asleep. What was a woman doing here, alone, on the moor at this hour? The sight of something alive, here in this deserted place, and at this hour, made him shiver. It was so out of all keeping with his thoughts and the place. Icy fingers of dread clutched his heart. Then he shrugged his shoulders and smiled. It was nothing. Some tourist out to see the moor. But what was a woman doing here alone, at this hour? None the less, here she was, moving slowly across the silvery waste toward the ruins that were so white and still in the glow of the dying moon.

Jarvais rubbed his eyes, shook his head, and looked again. The shadow was still there, but becoming fainter, and more distant. He paused, and suddenly a thought came to him. Shadows were cast by bodies; they were mere reflections of a concrete shape. Perhaps a wind-blown tree had cast it. But the shadow, which seemed a woman, was bodiless. There was only the shadow, and no figure. shadow to cast such strange reflections. To find that the shadow was actually bodiless brought back all his first terror—the sense of dread that he had first experienced. This was not earthly. It was uncanny. Impossible. Yet his eyes told him that the impossible was fact.

Through his mind raced all the tales he had heard of this lonely, lovely country, of things that should be dead, but lived; things spoken of only in whispers, and never to be mentioned. The shadow was moving toward the ruins. What was happening here beneath his window—strange, weird, terrorizing? There was but one thing to do—follow.

Silently he dropped over the rail of the low balcony, caught up with and followed behind the shadow of the woman, if woman it were.

It seemed to Jarvais that this ghostly pursuit lasted for hours. Now he would lose it and would wait. Then in a few moments he would see the dim outlines again before him, always moving toward that heap of rocks—the ruins that had held his fancy with their starkness. Now and then clouds scudded across the face of the moon, and the moor took on strange lights and patches of color.

On and on he followed, and suddenly stopped dead-still, for in the place of the one shadow there now were many, all hurrying in the same direction toward the ruins—bodiless shapes that moved noiselessly before him.

Now that they were nearing the ruins, Jarvais could make out how crude they were, how rough-hewn; yet withal they held a subtle sense of majestic power, of latent evil; a sense of darkness and decay; a sense of age and forgotten secrets. He wondered who were the people that had built them, what strange gods they had worshiped here, and how many savage cries of exultation had risen on the still, moonlit air, and echoed far across the now deserted moor.

From out of the stillness came a weird sound—then music soft and low in the distance, soft and yet with an eery strain that chilled his blood and echoed in his brain. The music increased its beat and time, and in it were savagery and cries of lust and forbidden desires. The shadows, with Jarvais close behind, were approaching the ruins, coming closer, ever closer, and the moon now setting in the west cast pale rays on the rude stones that lay sprawling in drunken rings. The music became more terrible, tore at his brain like iron fingers. Strange voices whispered of uncanny, revolting mysteries; obscene shapes floated before his eyes. Ever, ever the music hammered at his brain. He stumbled and nearly fell. The gibbering in his ears increased, became more awful, more degrading, more passionately revolting. The music throbbed through all his senses. Frenzy swayed him, and swept away his last touch of wisdom. He was a primate—one of the first men—uncivilized, terror-stricken—back in the dawn of time—back with black terror and the rolling drums.

He gave way to the madness of the music, cast aside his garments and ran as naked as the first man after the shadows that were converging in a dark mass toward the narrow entryway between two huge, rough-hewn pillars. With a cry of exultation, Jarvais sprang after them, and then it seemed to him that the whole world was shaken by a thunderclap; a heavyweight struck across his shoulder; he moved forward, stumbled, and fell. As through a mist he saw flickering lights and heard hoots and bellows, and in his brain echoed screeches and cat-calls. The music roared into a terrifying crescendo, then blackness and oblivion came upon him.

He awoke to painful consciousness, in the gray of an early dawn, shivering and cold, surprized to find himself here alone, naked upon the gray and barren moor. How had he gotten here? Then memory came back to him. He recalled how he had run screaming, naked in the moonlight; remembered the shadow, and the horror at the ruins. He looked up and saw he was lying not more than five feet from the entrance.

Seen in the light of dawn, the piles were still sinister, but not horrible—a mass of gray, tumble-down rocks and crude broken columns—sinister, but surely no terror could lurk within them. Soon Jarvais located his castoff clothing, and wearily started to return to the inn, which he could see in the distance, but surely not the distance he had come on the preceding night. Shakily he laughed, for he must have been running around in circles. He decided he would tell no one of his nocturnal adventures.

Unobserved he gained his room, and after bathing and dressing he joined his friend for breakfast. Nothing was said concerning his experiences, and in the afternoon they returned to London.

Once more at home, Jarvais plunged into work with a new vigor, striving in it to erase from his mind the events of that night upon the moor—the night with all its unexplained, mysterious happenings and horrors, over which brooded those aged, ageless ruins. Slowly, as time passed, the thing began to slip from his memory, to be recalled only on moonlit nights, when he had stayed too long over his books.

As he was reading the paper one morning, he ran across an item that at once attracted his attention, and caused him to remember too vividly things he wished to forget, things that had tugged at his mind despite his desire to let them slip into the place of unwanted memories. The item was dated at the little village where he had spent that never-to-be-forgotten time:

Dead Man Found on Moor



Early this morning the body of Charles Gilbert, living at the Blue Boar Tavern, was found on the moor near the ruined temple, naked, and his head crushed by a mammoth rock, apparently fallen from the ruins. How such a huge slab had been dislodged is one of the mysteries that surround this case. Near the body were found the nightclothes of the dead man. No motive for the crime was apparent. The mere fact of the body’s being there has only deepened the mystery. Gilbert was a famous student of pre-druidistic culture and remains.

To Jarvais came an overwhelming desire to revisit the moor, to see again its sinister ruins and the bodiless shadows. He wished to solve, if possible, the enigma hidden behind those rings of crouching stones. Here was something deadly, something dangerous that had taken human life and would beyond all doubt be unappeased until more had fallen under its malevolent spell.

Quickly he packed, as if fearing he might change his mind, and returned to the little inn that nestled on the border of the somber moor, where such strange events had taken place.

He found the place almost deserted. The mysterious death of Gilbert had frightened away the casual tourists. The innkeeper was pathetically glad to see Jarvais. He bustled up, and after having arranged with him about his room, he asked, “And what are you doing here, Mr. Jarvais?”

“I came up for a rest and a little quiet, Johnson.”

“Well, you’ll get it here, sir. No one comes here any more after Mr. Gilbert’s death, sir. It’s the moor. She frightens them. She’s bad—is the moor. No one knows her secrets, and if they do learn—well, they don’t come back, sir.”

Jarvais looked at him for a moment, and then broke the silence that followed the innkeeper’s last remark. “What do you know about those ruins?”

“Well, Mr. Jarvais, not much, sir. But I know this: I wouldn’t go there for a million pounds, I wouldn’t. There’s things there, sir, that a man better not talk about. There’s death there and worse.”

“Pshaw! Don’t be an ass, Johnson,” said Jarvais crossly, and climbed the stairs to his room.

After his dinner, Jarvais strolled toward the village, which lay at no great distance from the inn. Lights glimmered yellowly through shuttered windows. At every house the door was strongly barred. As the dusk deepened into darkness the few people who were upon the streets disappeared, and except for the glow of a few poor street-lamps, the village was dead and deserted.

Jarvais returned to his lodging, ready to take up his nocturnal vigil. He sat in the unlighted room, trying to pierce the mystery that lay out there on the silent moor. Downstairs the inn clock struck 2, the fire that had played so merrily upon his hearth was sending out its last dying rays, and the lights flickering over Hie walls made ghostlike figures that danced and rolled like souls in torture. Jarvais arose with a sigh, and opening his casement windows he stepped out upon the balcony.

The air was cold, with a touch of winter in its fingertips, but the moor was bright—brighter even than on that other night six months before. Shivering slightly, he stood waiting, with his eyes intent upon the patch of lawn where first he had seen the shadow which had no body.

Very slowly time passed. Twice he had heard the clock below stairs strike the hour. Finally Jarvais felt certain that nothing would occur this night, went to bed, and at once fell asleep.

Dream after dream pursued each other through his brain, each more horrible than the last. Queer bloated things danced with witches, and a monstrous hairy being without eyes performed strange rites. The eery music of the moor echoed in his brain, and in all these dreams the ruins had their grim and terrifying part, silently, broodingly overlooking the obscenity within the circle of crumbling rocks. He awoke in a cold sweat of terror, and lay for some time almost fearing to return to sleep, but finally he dropped off into untroubled rest.

After a meager breakfast he mapped out his procedure for the day. He had a letter to write, and then the rest of the day to inspect the ruins. So after posting a letter to a firm in London he shouldered his knapsack of lunch and went to spend the day upon the moor.

When he reached the ruins he stood and inspected them carefully. On that sunshiny morning the gray pile of rock looked very peaceful; vines and mosses grew here and there over them; on some of the stones were crude, carven figures, and designs half obliterated by storm and decay. As he was walking around the circle of broken rocks he soon saw the gateway through which he had plunged on that never-to-be-forgotten night. He entered and found himself in a hollowed circle which was several inches below the level of the moor. Nothing was visible except hard-packed earth. Carefully he searched for footprints, but found none. Then from the inside he examined diligently each post and stone for some sign of recent use, but again he drew a blank.

Giving up his quest for the time, he ate his lunch and then continued the search as fruitlessly as before. As far as appearances showed, there had been no one here for ages. But here a thought struck him. Before the death of Gilbert the ruins had been frequently visited by tourists, and yet there was no sign of them. Certainly this was queer. It was a puzzle he could not solve.

Tiring of his useless search, he left the ruins and started for the village and the inn. As he reached the entrance of the ruins, and stooped over to pick up his knapsack, he noticed, hidden in a crevice between the stones, a fragment of paper. He picked it up and looked at it closely. It was dirty, torn and weather-beaten, a leaf evidently tom from a notebook, for the paper was small and could very easily have fitted into the pocket. It had been carelessly torn, for only a part of a sentence was visible. The handwriting was neat and painstaking. This scrap of writing had neither beginning nor end:

“. . . discovered secret today; will return for further investigation tonight; the altar is——” Then came the tear running clear across the page. In the still remaining upper corner were the initials C. G.

Evidently the dead man on the moor had found something that had eluded Jarvais. The mention of the altar puzzled him. Surely the matter was becoming more involved—more mystifying. Jarvais was as much lost in darkness as he had been before. The thing had a deeper look. He could see no beginning and no end. Placing the scrap of paper in his wallet, and turning the jumble of thoughts over in his mind, he returned to his lodgings.

As he opened the door, Jarvais was impressed by the bright hospitality of the place. The inn’s room was cheerily alight, a huge fire blazed and flickered on the hearth, and around it, seated in a semicircle, were some of the village worthies. The smoke of their pipes wreathed about their heads.

“It is,” said Jarvais to himself, “like a page straight out of Dickens.”

The opening of the door caused them to turn and stare at him, and in the memorable manner of all villagers, they spoke to him courteously. Little Johnson, the innkeeper, bustled up and made a place for him around the circle, and when Jarvais had been made comfortable with a cigar and a glass of steaming toddy, the innkeeper introduced him.

“This is Mr. Jarvais, the writing gentleman who wants to know somew’at o’ the moor. Mr. Jarvais, these are the mayor and the selectmen of the village.”

There was a silence for some time as though all were plunged deeply into thought. Finally an old graybeard, the mayor, shook his head and spoke.

“There ain’t none of us here that knows much about her, sir, nothing at all. Except George here, and George he can’t speak, poor fellow, ’cause he’s dumb.”

Jarvais followed the pointing finger and saw, huddled in a comer, as close to the fire as possible, a wisp of a man, so emaciated and dried up that he looked like a mummy. Countless centuries seemed to have passed over his head; how old he was Jarvais could not judge. The countenance was terrifying—not a face at all, but a ghastly caricature of a human face. Always, Jarvais thought, it would haunt his dreams. Dreadful, worse than bestial, it leered at him from across the room. The mouth, a flabby gash, from whieh saliva trickled down the chin, moved constantly, emitting little clucking noises. The eyes fascinated Jarvais like the eyes of a snake; they were round, full, nearly opaque, of a dull gray glassiness shot with fine red lines.

“Why, he is blind, as well as dumb!” exclaimed Jarvais.

“That he is, sir. He walked too late on the moor one moonlight night and saw the shadows.”

The last word scattered all of Jarvais’ fast-disappearing equanimity. So the shadows were common gossip.

"The shadows!” he exclaimed.

“Yes, sir. They haunt the moor near the ruins and mean death or worse to such as see them.”

“But, George isn’t dead!”

“No, sir. He ran away before he heard the music, and don’t you think he would be better dead? There be strange things on the moor, cries and shouts and lights where there ain’t nothin’, nor nobody. I tell you, sir, we stay clear o’ the moor on the moonlight nights, sir, in the summer and late fall. Rest o’ the time nothin’ happens. It’s best not to go out o’ doors on them nights. Them ruins is terrible, they be haunted places and it be wise not to go anywhere close to them, sir. I warned Mr. Gilbert, him that was killed, you know, but he wouldn’t pay no attention to me and they got him.”

“Who are they?” asked Jarvais, sensing that he was getting to the crux of the matter at last.

“They be shadows, sir; shadows that ain’t got no bodies, so I hear. I ain’t seen them yet, praise God.”

Shortly after this, Jarvais, tiring of the now commonplace conversation, excused himself, and leaving the circle around the fire, went to his room. Switching on the light he noticed a package lying on his table; it was the book he had ordered from London, entitled Pre-Druidistic Ruins in England. Seating himself in a chair beside the shaded reading-light, he was soon deeply engrossed in his purchase. As he read on and on, he stopped with a jerk, and then re-read more carefully the following two paragraphs:

“Perhaps the most interesting of these ancient ruins are those at Humbledon, which are the earliest known, as far as we have been able to trace. How far back beyond the druids and their religion these ruins of another race and age go, we can only estimate. It is, in fact, almost impossible to tell. There is another factor that makes the piles at Humbledon of exceeding interest to students. While it is, as we have stated before, the oldest of the ruins, it is, strangely, the best preserved, and so far as investigation can go, there is no sound reason for this being the case. The carving in most cases is remarkably clear, and the dancing-ring almost in its original state.

“Here, however, we encounter the most peculiar factor in these remains. While the dancing-ring is very wonderfully preserved, the moon altar, which is the distinguishing feature of most pre-druidistic piles, is missing. The moon altar in all similar ruins discovered is a huge stone carved in the shape of a new moon. From all evidence we can gather, the victim, or the sacrifice, to term it more fitly, was tied between the horns of these altars, and then sacrificed by the sacred knife that is shown in many carvings. It seemingly carried a huge, crescent-shaped blade and must, from the pictures, have had an edge like a razor. In most cases the altar is found in the exact center of the dancing-ring. There has been intensive search made for the one at Humbledon, but so far without satisfaction. The absence of the altar in this, the best preserved of all pre-druidistic remains, makes one of the most fascinating studies for the student of these things.”

As he finished reading, Jarvais remembered the slip of paper he had found on the moor early that morning —that tom scrap that ended so suddenly: “the altar is-.” What could the rest of the sentence be? What was lost by his not having the remaining fragment? Undoubtedly Gilbert had found the answer to the puzzle and the answer to the great secret of the moor—the secret that had eluded all the other students and archeologists. Why, here in the best preserved of all these ruins, was there no moon altar? Even in the most ravaged of the others, the altar was conspicuous, but here none could be found.

At last Jarvais arose and stretched himself. He was cramped and tired. He looked at his watch. It was after 2. He had sat engrossed in his reading longer than he had realized.

Pulling on a sweater, Jarvais opened his casements and stepped upon the balcony. Again it was moonlight, for this was the season of the moon, when bright nights were common and the people of the village kept behind barred doors. The moor was white, cold, and apparently tenantless. The night was very still. Not even the breath of a breeze stirred the trees, and the shadows of the buildings and the shrubbery were solid black patches of darkness on the silver lawn. Over the moor, far in the distance, were the ruins, clear-cut and white beneath the moon. But there was always about them, Jarvais thought, a majestic power holding threats, and a menace of dark deeds still unfulfilled.

He stood looking intently at the patch of lawn where first he had seen the shadow. He waited for what seemed to him hours; then, as his glance wandered and came back, he saw it! The shadow!

Again it was a woman who moved apparently stealthily across the lawn, but over the moor, ever toward the ruins. Stealthily Jarvais followed after her. Emulating Ulysses, he had stuffed his ears with cotton, because he had no desire to hear the throb of the music that turned his blood to flame. On and on he followed the ghostly chase. As before, he pursued the shadow, now losing it in some patch of darkness, now seeing it once more as it crossed an open place—on and on, keeping well behind the bodiless woman. Though he could not hear, he could sense that now the music was swelling out over the moor. Because of the cotton in his ears, he remained unmoved. The pace of the shadow quickened and he hastened after it.

They were now at the gateway. For some time Jarvais had been noticing the growing number of shadowy forms. The space before the entrance to the dancing-floor was crowded with wriggling, hurrying black shapes. The strangeness of being able to see all this that no other living person, except dumb George, had ever seen, thrilled Jarvais deeply. But then suddenly a thought came to him. The sight had made that other both blind and dumb, yet he himself was not affected in the least. What was the reason for this? Its mystery allured him, but he dismissed it from his mind, and sped on after the shadows. He could tell from the way the shadows were moving that the music was now booming on the air, full of hate and lust and darkness. The very thought made him think of those eery fantasmagoria of the Grand Guignol.

They were now at the very threshold of the dancing-floor. Something grasped Jarvais by the shoulders and hurled him through the gateway. Then, hearing a crash behind him that penetrated even through the cotton in his ears, so close he was to it, he turned and saw a huge slab that had fallen from the top of the archway and now lay in the exact center of the entrance. It seemed to him that the huge stone had an intention—a purpose—a malevolent design. Its fall seemed timed to the fraction of a second. Had it not been for that impetus from unseen forces—had he been but a moment slower—he would have been crushed to pulp beneath its ponderous weight. As he now glanced at it he thought it seemed to have a personality—-a soul old and evil—longing to crush to atoms the lives of those who entered its once sacred portals. The mystery of Gilbert’s death upon the moor had now been solved: he had been but a moment too late to cross the threshold.

Jarvais swung around again and faced the hard-packed earth of the dancing-floor. Here the shadows were gathered in a ring, circling, whirling to the soundless music, now turning this way, now spinning that, in complete silence, yet in a mad frenzy of motion.

As Jarvais watched them, it seemed as though he were becoming paralyzed, and too, something was affecting his eyes—objects became blurred and hazy, yet the shadows themselves became more and more distinct. With a rush the shadows came together, and in a mass. The dance grew wilder and more abandoned.



Suddenly they stopped with shadowy arms uplifted. In the exact center of the dancing-floor, something was rising; inch by inch it seemed to struggle through the hard-packed earth. Finally, Jarvais could partly distinguish what it was—a huge stone; and by the paleness of the moon, now dimming on the horizon’s edge, he could make out its odd shape, which seemed like a monstrous half-moon lying on its back with its two sharp horns pointing skyward. Beside it was another shadow with arms uplifted: that of a man, huge and powerful. Jarvais had never seen a man of such stature. He could see the shadow’s giant torso: the swelling chest, the pillar-like legs, and the arms long and muscular with great, long-fingered, prehensile hands—all this cast in high relief against the whiteness of the altar, for altar he now knew it to be. At last the moor had given up to him her deepest secret, and he knew, too, why the search of all but Gilbert had been unsuccessful—and Gilbert had paid with his life for the secret.

The shadow-man lowered his arms and the multitude of shades threw themselves on their faces as the altar finally came to rest on the surface of the floor. To Jarvais it seemed as if thick smoke rolled before his eyes. As through a cloud he saw the shadow-man rise and turn toward him and point a commanding finger. For the first time real terror smote him, and he knew such fear as few men have ever known. He tried to turn and run, but it was as if he were turned to stone as heavy and solid as those silent gray rocks about him. Amid the gathering blackness he saw the shadows, now dimmed, spring suddenly upon him. He felt hot breaths on his cheek. Shapeless, shadowy hands tore at him; strong hands they were. Surely such strength could not belong to bodiless shadows. But he could see no one—just a rolling mass of deeper blackness in the mist before his eyes.

The shadows overbore him and carried him along. Strong arms lifted him up, and now he caught a stench as of something long dead, and of rottenness beyond human ken—yet not dead, but alive, for the dead have no strength, and here was strength abundant. High, high aloft he was lifted; up, up to the altar. The mist that had been before his eyes cleared and he could still feel unseen shadowy hands that tugged at him, pulled at his feet. Up he went, until he could plainly see the fearful carvings on the altar—too horrible even to glance at again. He felt himself wrenched and stretched out and out, and then found himself strung between the horns of the mighty altar.

The moon had almost set, and it was throwing its last dim rays across the plain. Unseen fingers tore the cotton from his ears, and at last he heard what he had dreaded to hear: that uncanny, bestial music of the ruins. It was playing, now softly, now rising in a hellish crescendo, while all about him danced the shadows, noiselessly, ceaselessly. He turned his eyes away and looked up. Towering over him was the tremendous man, or rather the shadow of some giant from the ancient past when the world must have been young and terrible. Stretching his arms toward the dying moon the man knelt. The music ceased with a throb, and the shadows prostrated themselves in a ring about the altar.

The sudden silence beat on Jarvais’ frayed nerves more horribly than the din of the music. Long it lasted, this silent prayer to the dying moon, but finally the huge shadow-man arose, reached below Jarvais, and took from its hiding-place a knife. There was nothing shadowy about the knife. It



flashed fire in the light and glistened evilly before his eyes. Fascinated, Jarvais watched the shadowy arm lift the crescent blade point-foremost toward the moon, hold it still, then lift it again, now hilt foremost, holding it quivering high in the air. Down came the mighty arm toward Jarvais' chest. He saw it begin slowly—oh so slowly—down, on down—nearer——. Then the moon set, and all was blackness and stillness on the moor.

[From a London paper]



Noted Novelist Disappears



The mysterious disappearance of Gerald Jarvais, one of England's most noted authors, has caused one of the biggest sensations of the day. Mr. Jarvais was spending a week-end at Humbledon on the moors. According to Edward Johnson, the innkeeper, Mr. Jarvais had sat in the main room of the inn until late, and then gone to his room. From there he disappeared. His bed had not been slept in, nor had he undressed for the night. Mr. Jarvais had no enemies, and the police are unable to find a clue to his whereabouts.



This is the second tragedy of the kind in the little town in as many months. The old wives of the village whisper of strange things on the moor, and say that Jarvais and Gilbert, the man found murdered last month, knew too much about the ruins on the moor. However, the police laugh at such ideas and believe that Mr. Jarvais was a victim of foul play. The Authors' League has offered a reward of a thousand pounds for information as to his whereabouts.





THE PURPLE SEA BY FRANK OWEN "She was weaving a golden thread of ecstacy from which there was no escape."



LEE GOONA lay upon the coral beach like a lifeless thing. His clothes were dripping with water and there were bits of seaweed clinging to his face. Every time a wave boomed up on the beach it broke in foam over his prostrate body, laving his face as though it were an elixir of life fighting to bring him back to consciousness. Again and again the water surged about him, toilsomely, endlessly. Utter solitude reigned. Not a sound broke the stillness except the booming of the waves.

Finally he opened his eyes. Everything swam giddily before his gaze. The universe was whirling round and round. To shut out the chaotic blur he closed his eyes again and rested. He clawed at the wet beach, reaching for life from the breast of the earth. For a few minutes he remained thus. Then slowly once more he gazed about him. Now the dizziness had lessened somewhat. He was able to make out objects dimly. Beyond him, beyond the rim of coral beach, stretched a fringe of palm-trees, the fronds of which stood out eerily against the sky. The whole sky was yellow, a pungent golden yellow, as though the sun had been a liquid globe that had suddenly burst, flooding everything in glistening splendor. Then he looked off toward the sea. Never had he beheld anything so fantastically beautiful. It was purple, as purple as the robes of kings. The foaming waves were as white as a trimming of ermine.

He had not the slightest idea where he was. His head was throbbing as though a dynamo were whirring within it. Something had happened, something terrible, something frightful, but what it was his poor brain could not recollect.

Again the soft breakers foamed over him. They felt delightfully cool against his poor, tired body. Off on the far horizon he could dimly make out a ship, a yellow ship with all sails set against the yellow sky, riding slowly upon the swell of the purple sea. The sails glistened as though they were of gold, like gold clouds piled up against the yellow sky. It was very unnatural, but then even the sea was unnatural, and also the fringe of palm-trees beyond him.

He rose weakly to his feet and waved his arms. Perhaps the ship would send out a small boat to rescue him. And then he commenced to meditate. To save him from what, and for what? Was he on an island or on a part of the mainland of Asia? His head began to throb again. It was burning, as though his mind were on fire. Still the ship sailed onward in the distance, a ghost-ship, a phantom-ship, a ship of imagery and dreams.

He felt as though he were standing on the edge of things. He knew not which way to turn. Before him might yawn a frightful abyss. His predicament was similar to that of a man who has been flung off the earth onto a new planet. Of course his thoughts were wild, for he was on the verge of delirium. Had he been in a shipwreck? His past was blotted out utterly as though it had been drowned in the purple sea.

As he stood there an insane desire took possession of him to get out to that golden ship. He waved his hands. He cried and screamed and moaned. The tears streamed down his face. He babbled incoherently. He craved companionship. He was as frantic as a helpless child, a child ruthlessly torn from its mother’s arms. He drooled at the mouth and prattled foolishly. Then he plunged into the purple sea. He would try to swim out to the golden ship. But the sea was gentle. He was seized in the soft arms of the waves and carried up onto the beach again. Time after time he fought his way into the water only to be washed back upon the beach.

At last he grew more calm. Some semblance of peace crept over him. With a sigh of weariness he threw himself at full length upon the sand. Now the purple of the sea was less vivid. It verged toward a bluish tone. The yellow haze of the sky grew more subdued. The glare lessened. But still the ship of the golden sails stood out upon the horizon like a lovely golden bird.

Lee Goona resigned himself to his fate. He was lost. Perhaps he was on an island without food or companionship. He was helpless. He fought to keep his nerves from again slipping beyond control. He decided that he would explore the country around him, but before doing so he would remain on the beach until the golden ship had faded from sight. It was too bad that he was unable to signal her, but he did not even have a match to light a fire even if he had had wood whereof to build it.

And then suddenly as he gazed off toward the far horizon he gave a start. The golden ship had veered in her course. He rubbed his eyes. Surely his vision was false! But no. The golden ship was sailing directly toward him. Of course it was still a great way out. Even now he might only be imagining that she was sailing toward the coral beach.

For a few minutes he gazed at the ship, spellbound. A great joy was rising within him. He tried to stifle it down, fearing it might only end in disappointment. If the ship changed her course now, his reason would snap. It would be frightful to have his hopes aroused only to be flung back into a bottomless abyss of despair.

Gradually as he watched the oncoming ship he realized that there could be no more doubt of the fact that he would soon be rescued. He felt like shouting for sheer delight. Not even for a complete day had he remained on the island. He assumed that it was a coral island because of the formation of the beach. Now the ship was close enough to launch a small boat. A half-dozen sailors climbed over the side. At once they bent to their oars. The small boat swept toward him rapidly. In a few moments it had been beached.



Lee goona gazed at the occupants of the boat. They were all ugly, as ugly as it seemed possible for human men to be. There was a suggestion of the Asiatic about their faces, the high cheek-bones and the flat noses. But they were not Chinese. They suggested a mongrel admixture. One was black. They looked extremely ferocious, but Lee Goona did not mind. They were there to rescue him; nothing else mattered. Without a word he climbed into the small boat and soon he was being rowed out toward the golden ship.

The sails gleamed more dazzlingly than ever as they neared it. Lee Goona grasped the rope ladder as the small boat came abreast and at once clambered up to the deck. The ship was far less inviting when he found himself on board. It was true that the sails still gleamed golden, but the ship and the deck itself were painted a dismal black, as though they had been painted with tar or road oil. Still he was on board, and that was much. He did not expect a private yacht.

As Lee Goona surveyed his surroundings the captain came ambling





of a man. His face was not ugly, but strong. His square jaw betokened an indomitable will. His eyes were shaded by eyebrows bushy and black. They perhaps emphasized the piercing blackness of his eyes. He looked like a god of the mountains, as powerful as an Atlas or a Jupiter.

"Well, now you are here," he said, "are you satisfied?" He laughed shortly, harshly, as he spoke—a laugh that was at strange variance to the rich, full, pleasant tone of his voice.

"I am more than satisfied," replied Lee Goona emphatically. "On that island I scarcely knew what was in store for me."

The captain smiled. "And do you know now?" he asked.

"No," admitted Lee Goona, "but at least I am among human beings."

"Do not use that term too carelessly," advised the captain. "In these wondrous days of advancement, of education and civilization, it is doubtful if anyone is really human. The recent war proved that. However, what matter? I am glad that you appreciate being on this ship. I hope your attitude lasts."





Of the voyage on that golden ship, volumes might be written—weird, unpleasant volumes which would not be agreeable to muse over. Lee Goona was assigned to a bunk in the forecastle, as dirty a bunk as could be imagined, a bunk nauseating beyond description, over which hordes of insects crawled. It was as though all the elegance of the ship were in the sails. The rest was reeking, rotting and vile beyond description. The food was of the commonest. Fish and biscuits, endlessly. The animal-like crew sat about the table and gorged the food. They tore off the fish in great chunks and crunched the biscuits noisily. A few there were who preferred the fish raw, and the oil and grease drooled from their lips.



Lee Goona was rather fastidious in his eating, and the sight revolted him. He was a devotee of cleanliness and there were times when the filth and insect life on the ship made him regret that he had left the coral beach. Starvation would be preferable to this beastlike existence.

And yet the captain interested him. His name was Jimber Jawn, and when the spirit moved him he could relate stories, legends and adventures in a magical manner.

Sometimes he stood for hours against the rail discussing things in the most affable manner. Other times there were when his face was black and somber and Lee Goona was afraid to address him.

"It is interesting to have someone to talk to who has at least a glimmering of intelligence," declared Jimber Jawn. "The rest of the animals on board can not visualize anything above gluttony."

Just when a great fear commenced to grip Lee Goona it was hard to say. Perhaps it was the logical result of endless days at sea in that reeking black hulk with the gorgeous golden sails. Or perhaps it was the fetid air, the crawling things and the frightful wrangling that forever polluted the forecastle. Whatever the cause, fear gripped him. Sometimes in the depth of the night he sprang up in his bunk, wide-eyed, terrified, shaking from head to foot. Some uncanny thing had stirred his slumbers. Had he heard a scream? Or was it merely the dreams of his subconscious mind? For hours he would lie afraid to close his eyes, and yet there was nothing more loathsome about the forecastle than there was on any other night.

Never while on board was he given any work to do. He helped at times at various tasks, but these were purely voluntary. Jimber Jawn talked with him a great deal. It could not be said that they became friends, because there was an aloofness about the captain that was hard to explain.

One night Jimber Jawn came to him in great excitement. "Quick," he directed, "follow me if you value your life." As he spoke he walked across the deck and lifted one of the steel hatches that led to the yawning blackness of the hold. "Climb down the rope ladder," continued Jimber Jawn hurriedly.

The tone of his voice was such that Lee Goona could not have dared to argue with him. He was well aware of the surging fury that lay hidden in the stalwart body of Jimber Jawn. Once one of the ugliest of the mongrel crew had crossed the captain; for one brief instant Jimber Jawn had stared at the cringing sailor; the next moment his great arm shot out. Lee Goona could never forget the cold thud of that blow, the sound of breaking bones, the low groan of the poor victim as he crashed to the deck. What had happened afterward he dreaded to ponder over. Such violence in a blow seemed unbelievable. It was not the blow of a human being but of some frightful, steel-like Frankenstein. Less than an hour later Jimber Jawn had talked to him delightfully of the comparative difference between Chinese and Japanese poetry.

Now, as Lee Goona was ordered down into the hold, he did as he was told. Jimber Jawn's tone, despite his evident excitement, was affable; but calm too is the air immediately preceding a typhoon. He was far from being a coward, but for the life of him he could not have protested against going.

The hold of the ship was as black and hot as the crater of a volcano. There was not the faintest crack of light. It was as awesomely black as the extreme of the ocean's depths. The rats scampered about him screeching and howling. They drowned the sounds of the happenings on deck. Once a great slimy rat scampered across his hand, leaving a streak of nauseating dampness upon it. He had been crouching on the floor, but at the touch of the dank skin he sprang to his feet with a startled cry.

All that day a storm had been brewing, and now it struck. Pandemonium raged upon the deck. In the blackness, Lee Goona wondered what evil deeds were being done. Was he aboard a pirate ship? An opium smuggler? Or was she engaged in slave-traffic? He did not know. Surmise as he would, he had no way of telling. The ship was groaning and moaning. Her beams were cracking under the pressure of the mighty waves. She rolled about at such a pitch that Lee Goona had trouble in keeping his feet. At last she rolled more ominously than ever, and he crashed to the floor, striking his head as he fell.

For a while he lay stunned. The rats screeched and screamed. They came and ran over his body in hordes. It was the patter of their cold, damp feet over his face that brought him to his senses. With a shriek which the roar of the wind drowned, he sprang to his feet, striking out blindly at the loathsome animals. In the darkness he crushed some beneath his feet. He was in a frenzy of loathing. His very flesh seemed to creep away from his bones. His head ached dully. No matter how hard he tried, he could not make out a angle thing in that well of blackness. The fetid air was frightful. He gasped for breath. Hotter and hotter it seemed to grow. To a great extent the increase in intensity of the heat was attributable to his nerves. He was on the verge of fever. If the heat continued it would burn him alive.

When all hope had died within him, the moaning and groaning of the ship ceased. Evidently the storm had passed, or at least lessened considerably. It was a relief to be able to keep his feet. At last there came a draft of fresh air. The hatch had been opened. The next moment Jimber Jawn appeared at the top of the rope ladder. He held a lantern far above his head.

"Come on up!" he cried, and his voice was as friendly as Lee Goona had ever heard it.



It was some time before Lee Goona's eyes could get used to the light on deck. For now the storm had passed completely and a pale yellow moon hung low in the sky. It lighted up the deck as though dawn had already broken. It created a street of golden light on the purple sea that stretched off to imagined isles of romance. It was a moment of superb beauty. The golden sails were set. They stood out clear-cut against the soft blue of the sky. He was surprized that the sails had not been lowered. Surely the ship had not ridden under full sail through that terrific storm! It was unnatural. But then the ship itself was unnatural, as unnatural as the purple tint of the sea.

He turned from the beauty of the moon to the stark black deck. In the moonlight, pools of what appeared to be blood glistened. Near by a human monstrosity stood and glared at him. The man's face was disfigured as though he had been mauled, and blood dripped from his lips. Another sailor near by had blood about his lips also; and as Lee Goona gazed upon him he extended a tongue that might have been that of a wolf, and licked the blood from his face. The act was bestial, for he seemed to lap up the blood with relish. Lee Goona had an uncomfortable feeling that the blood-stains had not been caused by the man’s own wounds.

Beyond him several musicians were playing softly on mandolins. They were crooning sweet melodies, songs of love and enchantment. As Lee Goona turned, he beheld a gorgeous golden girl, a China girl of surpassing beauty, dressed in a single garment of sheer silk that was drawn tightly about her. It, too, was golden, and it emphasized the glorious perfection of her slender body. Jimber Jawn stood over her. He was breathing heavily.

"Dance!" Jimber Jawn cried tensely. "Dance!"

Lee Goona walked over and squatted down on the deck beside Jimber Jawn. Here was drama—gorgeous, romantic drama fit for kings.

The slender girl gazed about her in bewilderment as though in that rabid throng she sought one face that held a ray of hope for her. And it so happened that her eyes met those of Lee Goona and stayed for a fractional minute. His expression had not changed, but a message had been flashed between them. Call it telepathy or what you will, it was enough. A bit of the strained expression left her face. She even smiled slightly, a smile that was all for Lee Goona, showing teeth more even and white than Ceylonese pearls.

And then she danced, danced as no girl ever danced before. Her gorgeous, golden, glowing body swayed in the breeze like a young elm. A suggestion of sandalwood sweetened the air. She was wooing Lee Goona through her dancing. She was weaving a golden web of ecstasy about him from which there was no escape. Through her dancing she was imploring him to save her.

No artist ever painted a picture more wondrous, more vivid than that black ship with the golden sails against the deep blue sky. The sheen of the orange moon upon the purple sea made a fantasy of it. And above all in perfection and glory that perfect golden girl, dancing. Every line of her slender figure was poetry more rare than the verses of Tai-Ta-mien.

Some time later Lee Goona sat in the stem of the ship. Absolute quietude reigned on board, unbroken save by the soft swish of the water against the sides of the ship and the occasional sighing of the wind against the sails. The moon was very low in the west. It was dipping into the sea beyond the far horizon. Only half of it still showed. It arched like a golden-orange doorway that led to realms of witchery. His head throbbed. His brow was flaming. If only he could plunge into the cool soft stillness of the purple sea! What mattered that oblivion might follow? He would be willing to be sucked down to the ocean's depths by death if only for the joy of floundering for a moment in the clear, cool water. He had to exert every effort not to slip overboard. That night romance had wrapped itself about his soul. It was a night of perfume, of hushed music and rare love. He could not bear the thought of going down into that foul, reeking cabin, putrid with vermin and beasts of men. He wished to remain on deck to dream. Who was this gorgeous, golden girl who had so suddenly appeared upon the ship? He remembered that he had been locked in the hold for hours. When he climbed back on deck there had been pools of blood about, and there had been blood, too, about the mouths of many of the seamen. Evidently there had been a fight, a fight for possession of that glorious golden girl. One glance at her had kindled the blood in Lee Goona like old wine. Naught remained to him now but to rescue that girl, to carry her off to some jewel-like coral isle where he could spend his days in poetry and his nights watching her dance in the moonlight upon the coral beach. His thoughts were wild and mad, though no madder than life itself had grown to be. Nothing real existed any longer. All was fantasy and wraiths. Ghosts are only the dreams that men have had.

Lee Goona glanced up quickly as there came a soft step on the deck beside him. He rose to his feet and stared in rapture at the lovely golden girl. At last she had come to him. Nothing must ever separate them now. To him she was the sun and the stars. She was the light of his life, the dream-girl that destiny had sent into his arms.

As he drew her to him, her fragrant hair brushed his cheek. There was music in the touch. In that moment he found the answer to the reason for existence over which he had pondered all his life. He kissed her warm lips, and the very breeze paused as he did so. It was the divine moment when their souls reached out to grasp each other. It was more than physical desire. There was something deeply spiritual about it.

Suddenly as they stood thus the girl uttered a frightened cry. She sprang away from him as Jimber Jawn reached their side. His face was working convulsively. The muscles stood out in knots on his bared arms. Lee Goona had no time to defend himself. He was caught unmercifully in those crushing arms and lifted high in the air as though his weight had been infinitesimal. For one brief instant Jimber Jawn paused, undecided whether to crash him to the deck and crush him beneath his heel as he might a viper. Lee Goona's fate hung by a thread. Then came the decision. Jimber Jawn flung him far over the rail into the purple sea. The waters closed above his head, delightfully cool. It was the sensation for which he had yearned. It was calm, restful. He felt like closing his eyes in immortal sleep.

Meanwhile the golden girl had climbed to the ship's rail. Even as Jimber Jawn reached for her she leaped into the sea, uttering a cry of grim delight, of deliverance. Lee Goona beheld her slim body strike the water. It aroused him from his lethargy. It brought him to a realization of their dire predicament. He was awake at last. He started to swim toward the golden girl.

But she was in no danger. She was swimming with the sure strokes of one used to the water from infancy. In the distance a fringe of palm-trees could be faintly discerned in the moonlight. Together they set off for the distant shore. Whatever the future might hold for them, they would not return to the black ship of the golden sails. Better to risk death in the purple sea than to face death at the hands of Jimber Jawn. Lee Goona knew that his life would be the penalty if he ever encountered the irate captain again.



For the next half-hour they cut through the water like fish. The moon had dipped from view and the stars seemed doubly bright, like lovely lanterns of the approaching dawn. Despite all that he could do, Lee Goona felt unconsciousness creeping over him. Whether it was sleep or the result of shocked nerves he neither knew nor cared. Either spelled death. Unless he could keep his eyes from closing, all hope was gone. Yet his eyes continued to close. He bit his lips till the blood came, so that the pain might keep him awake. But it was useless. Slowly, persistently, sleep crept over him. Finally he lost consciousness. The waters of the purple sea closed softly over his head. And all was blackness, as black as the putrid hold of the ship of the golden sails.

When Lee Goona opened his eyes he lay on a coral beach. Beyond him stretched a fringe of palm-trees whose fronds stood out in strong silhouette against the yellow, golden haze of the sky. Before him lay the purple sea, white breakers booming softly upon the coral sand.

He rose to a sitting posture and rubbed his eyes. Gradually the truth dawned upon him. For hours or maybe days he had lain delirious upon the beach. The ship of the golden sails, Jimber Jawn, the lovely girl, all were but figments of his imagination, of his delirium. None of them existed. It was devastating to realize that he had fallen in love with an exquisite girl who existed only in his delirium. His life was ruined. He had returned to reality. Reality was a curse. His head still throbbed as though someone were playing a steady tattoo upon it. Bit by bit memory returned to him, fragmentary but credible. He was Lee Goona, a tea-merchant with offices in Canton, Tokio and in several of the islands lying near Formosa. He had been returning to Canton from his island stations when a terrific typhoon had seized the ship, tossed it about as though it had been a cork, and finally crushed it against a rock-reef as though it had been paper. What followed after that he could not remember. Evidently he had been washed by the waves upon this coral beach. And it was at this point that his delirium commenced. He had never beheld a ship with golden sails standing out like a bird against the yellow sky. All the ensuing imagery had been purely fantasies surging through his distorted mind. They did not exist, but they had played havoc with his life. He was in love with a beautiful dream. His head still throbbed. If it would only burst and put an end to that existence which had become a curse! The sight of the purple sea under the yellow sky was nauseous to him.

In despair he turned toward the fringe of palms. As he did so he beheld a figure coming toward him, the figure of his gorgeous golden girl. She waved her hand to him and she was smiling. What it meant, he could not tell. Had the thread of his reason snapped again? For now the fantasy had become the real. He could not explain it, nor did he try, for the wondrous girl was nestling in his arms and he was kissing lips more fragrant than wild cherries.

"We are saved," she whispered softly. "There is a friendly settlement of pearl divers on the other side of the island, and once a week a trading-schooner stops there en route to old Canton.





The Three Witches



By ERNEST DOWSON



(Reprint)



All the moon-shed nights are over,

⁠And the days of gray and dun;

There is neither may nor clover,

⁠And the day and night are one.

Not an hamlet, not a city

⁠Meets our strained and tearless eyes;

In the plain without a pity,

⁠Where the wan grass droops and dies.

We shall wander through the meaning

⁠Of a day and see no light,

For our lichened arms are leaning

⁠On the ends of endless night.

We, the children of Astarte,

⁠Dear abortions of the moon,

In a gay and silent party,

⁠We are riding to you soon.

Burning ramparts, ever burning!

⁠To the flame which never dies

We are yearning, yearning, yearning,

⁠With our gay and tearless eyes.

In the plain without a pity,

⁠(Not an hamlet, not a city)

⁠Where the wan grass droops and dies.





A Short, Shuddery Tale Is

The Dream Snake



By ROBERT E. HOWARD



THE night was strangely still. As we sat upon the wide veranda, gazing out over the broad, shadowy lawns, the silence of the hour entered our spirits and for a long while no one spoke.

Then far across the dim mountains that fringed the eastern skyline, a faint haze began to glow, and presently a great golden moon came up, making a ghostly radiance over the land and etching boldly the dark clumps of shadows that were trees. A light breeze came whispering out of the east, and the unmowed grass swayed before it in long, sinuous waves, dimly visible in the moonlight; and from among the group upon the veranda there came a swift gasp, a sharp intake of breath that caused us all to turn and gaze.

Faming was leaning forward, clutching the arms of his chair, his face strange and pallid in the spectral light; a thin trickle of blood seeping from the lip in which he had set his teeth. Amazed, we looked at him, and suddenly he jerked about with a short, snarling laugh.

"There's no need of gawking at me like a flock of sheep!" he said irritably and stopped short. We sat bewildered, scarcely knowing what sort of reply to make, and suddenly he burst out again.

"Now I guess I'd better tell the whole thing or you'll be going off and putting me down as a lunatic. Don't interrupt me, any of you! I want to get this thing off my mind. You all know that I'm not a very imaginative man; but there's a thing, purely a figment of imagination, that has haunted me since babyhood. A dream!" He fairly cringed back in his chair as he muttered, "A dream! and God, what a dream! The first time—no, I can't remember the first time I ever dreamed it—I've been dreaming the hellish thing ever since I can remember. Now it's this way: there is a sort of bungalow, set upon a hill in the midst of wide grasslands—not unlike this estate; but this scene is in Africa. And I am living there with a sort of servant, a Hindoo. Just why I am there is never clear to my waking mind, though I am always aware of the reason in my dreams. As a man of a dream, I remember my past life (a life which in no way corresponds with my waking life), but when I am awake my subconscious mind fails to transmit these impressions. However, I think that I am a fugitive from justice and the Hindoo is also a fugitive. How the bungalow came to be there I can never remember, nor do I know in what part of Africa it is, though all these things are known to my dream self. But the bungalow is a small one of a very few rooms, and is situated upon the top of the hill, as I said. There are no other hills about and the grasslands stretch to the horizon in every direction; knee-high in some places, waist-high in others.

"Now the dream always opens as I am coming up the hill, just as the sun is beginning to set. I am carrying a broken rifle and I have been on a hunting trip; how the rifle was broken, and the full details of the trip, I clearly remember—dreaming. But never upon waking. It is just as if a curtain were suddenly raised and a drama began; or just as if I were suddenly transferred to another man’s body and life, remembering past years of that life, and not cognizant of any other existence. And that is the hellish part of it! As you know, most of us, dreaming, are, at the back of our consciousness, aware that we are dreaming. No matter how horrible the dream may become, we know that it is a dream, and thus insanity or possible death is staved off. But in this particular dream, there is no such knowledge. I tell you it is so vivid, so complete in every detail, that I wonder sometimes if that is not my real existence and this a dream! But no; for then I should have been dead years ago.

"As I was saying, I come up the hill and the first thing I am cognizant of that is out of the ordinary is a sort of track leading up the hill in an irregular way; that is, the grass is mashed down as if something heavy had been dragged over it. But I pay no especial attention to it, for I am thinking, with some irritation, that the broken rifle I carry is my only arm and that now I must forego hunting until I can send for another.

"You see, I remember thoughts and impressions of the dream itself, of the occurrences of the dream; it is the memories that the dream 'I' has, of that other dream existence that I can not remember. So. I come up the hill and enter the bungalow. The doors are open and the Hindoo is not there. But the main room is in confusion; chairs are broken, a table overturned. The Hindoo's dagger is lying upon the floor, but there is no blood anywhere.

"Now, in my dreams, I never remember the other dreams, as sometimes one does. Always it is the first dream, the first time. I always experience the same sensations, in my dreams, with as vivid a force as the first time I ever dreamed. So. I am not able to understand this. The Hindoo is gone, but (thus I ruminate, standing in the center of the disordered room) what did away with him? Had it been a raiding party of negroes they would have looted the bungalow and probably burned it. Had it been a lion, the place would have been smeared with blood. Then suddenly I remember the track I saw going up the hill, and a cold hand touches my spine; for instantly the whole thing is clear: the thing that came up from the grasslands and wrought havoc in the little bungalow could be naught else except a giant serpent. And as I think of the size of the spoor, cold sweat beads my forehead and the broken rifle shakes in my hand.

“Then I rush to the door in a wild panic, my only thought to make a dash for the coast. But the sun has set and dusk is stealing across the grasslands. And out there somewhere, lurking in the tall grass is that grisly thing—that horror. God!" The ejaculation broke from his lips with such feeling that all of us started, not realizing the tension we had reached. There was a second's silence, then he continued:

"So I bolt the doors and windows, light the lamp I have and take my stand in the middle of the room. And I stand like a statue—waiting—listening. After a while the moon comes up and her haggard light drifts through the windows. And I stand still in the center of the room; the night is very still—something like this night; the breeze occasionally whispers through the grass, and each time I start and clench my hands until the nails bite into the flesh and the blood trickles down my wrists—and I stand there and wait and listen but it does not come that night!" The sentence came suddenly and explosively, and an involuntary sigh came from the rest; a relaxing of tension.

"I am determined, if I live the night through, to start for the coast early the next morning, taking my chance out there in the grim grasslands—with it. But with morning, I dare not. I do not know in which direction the monster went; and I dare not risk coming upon him in the open, unarmed as I am. So, as in a maze, I remain at the bungalow, and ever my eyes turn toward the sun, lurching relentlessly down the sky toward the horizon. Ah, God! if I could but halt the sun in the sky!"

The man was in the dutch of some terrific power; his words fairly leaped at us.

"Then the sun rocks down the sky and the long gray shadows come stalking across the grasslands. Dizzy with fear, I have bolted the doors and windows and lighted the lamp long before the last faint glow of twilight fades. The light from the windows may attract the monster, but I dare not stay in the dark. And again I take my stand in the center of the room—waiting."

There was a shuddersome halt. Then he continued, barely above a whisper, moistening his lips: "There is no knowing how long I stand there; Time has ceased to be and each second is an eon; each minute is an eternity stretching into endless eternities. Then, God! but what is that?" he leaned forward, the moonlight etching his face into such a mask of horrified listening that each of us shivered and flung a hasty glance over our shoulders.

"Not the night breeze this time," he whispered. "Something makes the grasses swish-swish—as if a great, long, pliant weight were being dragged through them. Above the bungalow it swishes and then ceases—in front of the door; then the hinges creak—creak! the door begins to bulge inward—a small bit—then some more!" The man's arms were held in front of him, as if braced strongly against something, and his breath came in quick gasps. "And I know I should lean against the door and hold it shut, but I do not, I can not move. I stand there, like a sheep waiting to be slaughtered—but the door holds!" Again that sigh expressive of pent-up feeling.

He drew a shaky hand across his brow. "And all night I stand in the center of that room, as motionless as an image, except to turn slowly, as the swish-swish of the grass marks the fiend's course about the house. Ever I keep my eyes in the direction of that soft, sinister sound. Sometimes it ceases for an instant, or for several minutes, and then I stand scarcely breathing, for a horrible obsession has it that the serpent has in some way made entrance into the bungalow, and I start and whirl this way and that, frightfully fearful of making a noise, though I know not why, but ever with the feeling that the thing is at my back. Then the sounds commence again and I freeze motionless.



" Now here is the only time that my consciousness, which guides my waking hours, ever in any way pierces the veil of dreams. I am, in the dream, in no way conscious that it is a dream, but, in a detached sort of way, my other mind recognizes certain facts and passes them on to my sleeping—shall I say 'ego'? That is to say, my personality is for an instant truly dual and separate to an extent, as the right and left arms are separate, while making up parts in the same entity. My dreaming mind has no cognizance of my higher mind; for the time being the other mind is subordinated and the subconscious mind is in full control, to such an extent that it does not even recognize the existence of the other. But the conscious mind, now sleeping, is cognizant of dim thought-waves emanating from the dream mind. I know that I have not made this entirely clear, but the fact remains that I know that my mind, conscious and subconscious, is near to ruin. My obsession of fear, as I stand there in my dream, is that the serpent will raise itself and peer into the window at me. And I know, in my dream, that if this occurs I shall go insane. And so vivid is the impression imparted to my conscious, now sleeping mind that the thought-waves stir the dim seas of sleep, and somehow I can feel my sanity rocking as my sanity rocks in my dream. Back and forth it totters and sways until the motion takes on a physical aspect and I in my dream am swaying from side to side. Not always is the sensation the same, but I tell you, if that horror ever raises its terrible shape and leers at me, if I ever see the fearful thing in my dream, I shall become stark, wild insane." There was a restless movement among the rest.

"God! but what a prospect!" he muttered. "To be insane and forever dreaming that same dream, night and day! But there I stand, and centuries go by, but at last a dim gray light begins to steal through the windows, the swishing dies away in the distance and presently a red, haggard sun climbs the eastern sky. Then I turn about and gaze into a mirror—and my hair has become perfectly white. I stagger to the door and fling it wide. There is nothing in sight but a wide track leading away down the hill through the grasslands—in the opposite direction from that which I would take toward the coast. And with a shriek of maniacal laughter, I dash down the hill and race across the grasslands. I race until I drop from exhaustion, then I lie until I can stagger up and go on.

"All day I keep this up, with superhuman effort, spurred on by the horror behind me. And ever as I hurl myself forward on weakening legs, ever as I lie gasping for breath, I watch the sun with a terrible eagerness. How swiftly the sun travels when a man races it for life! A losing race it is, as I know when I watch the sun sinking toward the skyline, and the hills which I had hoped to gain ere sundown seemingly as far away as ever."

His voice was lowered and instinctively we leaned toward him; he was gripping the chair arms and the blood was seeping from his lip.

"Then the sun sets and the shadows come and I stagger on and fall and rise and reel on again. And I laugh, laugh, laugh! Then I cease, for the moon comes up and throws the grasslands in ghostly and silvery relief. The light is white across the land, though the moon itself is like blood. And I look back the way I have come—and far—back"—all of us leaned farther toward him, our hair a-prickle; his voice came like a ghostly whisper—"far back—I—see—the—grass—waving. There is no breeze, but the tall grass parts and sways in the moonlight, in a narrow, sinuous line—far away, but nearing every instant." His voice died away.

Somebody broke the ensuing stillness: "And then——?"

"Then I awake. Never yet have I seen the foul monster. But that is the dream that haunts me, and from which I have wakened, in my childhood screaming, in my manhood in cold sweat. At irregular intervals I dream it, and each time, lately"—he hesitated and then went on—"each time lately, the thing has been getting closer—closer—the waving of the grass marks his progress and he nears me with each dream; and when he reaches me, then——"

He stopped short, then without a word rose abruptly and entered the house. The rest of us sat silent for awhile, then followed him, for it was late.



How long I slept I do not know, but I woke suddenly with the impression that somewhere in the house someone had laughed, long, loud and hideously, as a maniac laughs. Starting up, wondering if I had been dreaming, I rushed from my room, just as a truly horrible shriek echoed through the house. The place was now alive with other people who had been awakened, and all of us rushed to Faming's room, whence the sounds had seemed to come.

Faming lay dead upon the floor, where it seemed he had fallen in some terrific struggle. There was no mark upon him, but his face was terribly distorted; as the face of a man who had been crushed by some superhuman force—such as some gigantic snake.





The Eyrie

What constitutes a "weird tale"? This question is answered so clearly and succinctly in a personal letter to the editor from H. P. Lovecraft, author of The Call of Cthulhu in this issue, that we can not forebear quoting him, although the letter is really an explanation of his own stories rather than a general discussion of the "weird tale."

"All my tales are based on the fundamental premise that common human laws and interests and emotions have no validity or significance in the vast cosmos-at-large," writes Mr. Lovecraft. "To me there is nothing but puerility in a tale in which the human form—and the local human passions and conditions and standards—are depicted as native to other worlds or other universes. To achieve the essence of real externality, whether of time or space or dimension, one must forget that such things as organic life, good and evil, love and hate, and all such local attributes of a negligible and temporary race called mankind, have any existence at all. Only the human senses and characters have human qualities. These must be handled with unsparing realism (not catchpenny romanticism), but when we cross the line to the boundless and hideous unknown—the shadow-haunted Outside—we must remember to leave our humanity and terrestrialism at the threshold.

"If I were writing an 'interplanetary' tale it would deal with beings organized very differently from mundane mammalia, and obeying motives wholly alien to anything we know upon Earth—the exact degree of alienage depending, of course, on the scene of the tale; whether laid in the solar system, or the utterly unplumbed gulfs still farther out—the nameless vortices of never-dreamed-of strangeness, where form and symmetry, light and heat, even matter and energy themselves, may be unthinkably metamorphosed or totally wanting. I have merely got at the edge of this in 'Cthulhu,' where I have been careful to avoid terrestrialism in the few linguistic and nomenclatural specimens from Outside which I present. All very well—but will the readers stand for it? That’s all they're likely to get from me in the future—except when I deal with definitely terrestrial scenes."



The popularity of Lovecraft’s stories in Weird Tales seems to provide a definite answer to his question, "Will the readers stand for it?" And when he has departed most widely from human motives and standards, as in The Outsider, he has attained the greatest favor with you, the readers of this magazine. It is such wholly unearthly standards that made the charm of Donald Wandrei's The Red Brain, in last October's Weird Tales; it is the utter strangeness and unterrestrialism of The Space-Eaters, by Frank Belknap Long, Jr. (shortly to be published), that give this story its gripping horror and fascination.

Clark Ashton Smith's unusual poem, The Saturnienne, has made a real hit with you, the readers, judging by the enthusiastic comment it has evoked.

"The Saturnienne is a masterpiece of its kind," writes Charles M. Walker, of Federalsburg, Maryland. “This poem is grotesque and unique, to say the least, and I would like to read more of this man's work."

"I read Clark Ashton Smith's bit of verse with delight," writes August W. Derleth, of Madison, Wisconsin. "I hope you run more of his poetry."

"Weird Tales appeals to me because it is different," writes M. Artine Miller, of Pine Ridge, Oregon. "I can always rely upon finding at least one entirely different story from any I have ever read. Long life and much success to Weird Tales."

Writes J. T. Ballew, of Newport News, Virginia: "For some time I have been a constant reader of Weird Tales, and find it the most interesting magazine on the market. Am casting my first vote, on stories in the December issue, for The Time-Raider; second, for The Infidel's Daughter; third, The Devils of Po Sung."

A joint letter, from "six California readers who are thrilled by your magazine," asks for more variety. "The historical weird story seems to be forgotten," write these readers from Los Angeles. "Did you ever have stories submitted with Napoleon or Washington or Cæsar as a ghost? Why not? These might be quite instructive at the same time, and remind us of historical events which we have forgotten since our school days. Too many of your newer writers seem to imitate Lovecraft, who is unique in his eery tales. Anybody trying to wield Lovecraft's thunder appears ridiculous. His tales can not be beaten for weirdness."

"The Time-Raider is one of the best serials that ever ran in your magazine," writes Ralph McCormack, of Ashland, Oregon. "Stories of thousands of years in the future are always interesting. I like this story much better than The Time Machine by that famous English author, H. G. Wells; he had the people of the future fragile, small creatures, and very timid. The people in his story were much worse off than we are now, and didn't know much about science. It seems to me that people would be very much more scientific in the future, as they are in Edmond Hamilton's serial in Weird Tales. I hope that you will publish more stories like The Time-Raider. In your December issue, I liked especially the man-eating orchids in The Devils of Po Sung. That was a great story."

"I am still avidly devouring W. T.," writes Lillia Price Savino, of Portsmouth, Virginia. "The stories are mostly good, some of them splendid, and I like them all; but I would like to see the illustrations more modestly done. My little daughter hides them in the bookcase when her boy friends call. A man to whom I recommended the magazine said he never bought a copy because of the glaring covers which gave the impression of a trashy affair; but when I told him Victor Rousseau was a regular contributor he seized upon it, and I do not think he ever misses a copy now. He is crazy over H. G. Wells, too, and Seabury Quinn, both of whom are Weird Tales writers. Well, it remains my favorite magazine, and I take a good many."

Nictzin Dyalhis writes from Columbus, Ohio: "Just looked over a copy of the December number. Must say that E. Hoffmann Price, with The Infidel's Daughter, is good. Also, I think that Rankin turns out the best-looking cover, so far as workmanship goes, that ever graced a Weird Tales magazine issue. He seems to have genuine imagination and the ability to express it creatively."

Readers, your favorite stories in the December issue, as shown by your votes, are The Infidel's Daughter, by E. Hoffmann Price; part third of The Time-Raider, by Edmond Hamilton; and The Devils of Po Sung, by Bassett Morgan. What is your favorite story in this issue? It will help us to keep the magazine in accord with your wishes if you will let us know which stories you like best; and which stories you dislike, if any.





This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was legally published within the United States (or the United Nations Headquarters in New York subject to Section 7 of the United States Headquarters Agreement) before 1964, and copyright was not renewed.

For Class A renewals records (books only) published between 1923 and 1963, check the Stanford University Copyright Renewal Database.

For other renewal records of publications between 1922–1950 see the University of Pennsylvania copyright records scans.

For all records since 1978, search the U.S. Copyright Office records.

See also the Rutgers copyright renewal records for further information.



Works published in 1928 would have had to renew their copyright in either 1955 or 1956, i.e. at least 27 years after they were first published/registered but not later than 31 December in the 28th year. As this work's copyright was not renewed, it entered the public domain on 1 January 1957.



* * *



This work may be in the public domain in countries and areas with longer native copyright terms that apply the rule of the shorter term to foreign works.





It is imperative that contributors search the renewal databases and ascertain that there is no evidence of a copyright renewal before using this license. Failure to do so will result in the deletion of the work as a copyright violation.





About this digital edition


This e-book comes from the online library Wikisource[1]. This multilingual digital library, built by volunteers, is committed to developing a free accessible collection of publications of every kind: novels, poems, magazines, letters...

We distribute our books for free, starting from works not copyrighted or published under a free license. You are free to use our e-books for any purpose (including commercial exploitation), under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported[2] license or, at your choice, those of the GNU FDL[3].

Wikisource is constantly looking for new members. During the transcription and proofreading of this book, it's possible that we made some errors. You can report them at this page[4].

The following users contributed to this book:

Hilohello

Nonexyst

Kathleen.wright5

Shuang Liu

Auric

Prosfilaes

CalendulaAsteraceae

Pasicles

Boris23

Blurpeace

Dschwen

ToBeFree

AzaToth

KABALINI

Bromskloss

Tene~commonswiki

Abigor

Bender235

Reisio

Zscout370

Dha

Technion

Indolences

Jacobolus

Dbenbenn

AdamBMorgan

Rocket000

Leonel Sohns

Steinsplitter

Blue-ray656

ShakespeareFan00

Sp1nd01

PatríciaR





* * *



↑ https://en.wikisource.org

↑ https://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0

↑ https://www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html

↑ https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Wikisource:Scriptorium





